See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260451096

Assessing the quality of the fossil record: insights from vertebrates
Article in Geological Society London Special Publications · December 2011
DOI: 10.1144/SP358.6

CITATIONS

READS

148

1,762

4 authors:
Michael J Benton

Alex Dunhill

University of Bristol

University of Leeds

738 PUBLICATIONS 32,016 CITATIONS

50 PUBLICATIONS 1,115 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

SEE PROFILE

Graeme T Lloyd

Felix G Marx

Macquarie University

Museum of New Zealand, Te Papa Tongarewa

75 PUBLICATIONS 3,946 CITATIONS

110 PUBLICATIONS 2,475 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Michael J Benton on 05 February 2015.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

Assessing the quality of the fossil record: insights from vertebrates
MICHAEL J. BENTON1*, ALEXANDER M. DUNHILL1, GRAEME T. LLOYD2 &
FELIX G. MARX1,3
1

School of Earth Sciences, University of Bristol, Wills Memorial Building,
Queen’s Road, Bristol, BS8 1RJ, UK

2

Department of Palaeontology, The Natural History Museum, Cromwell Road,
London, SW7 5BD, UK

3

Department of Geology, University of Otago, PO Box 56, Dunedin 9054, New Zealand
*Corresponding author (e-mail: mike.benton@bristol.ac.uk)
Abstract: Assessing the quality of the fossil record is notoriously hard, and many recent attempts
have used sampling proxies that can be questioned. For example, counts of geological formations
and estimated outcrop areas might not be defensible as reliable sampling proxies: geological formations are units of enormously variable dimensions that depend on rock heterogeneity and fossil
content (and so are not independent of the fossil record), and outcrop areas are not always proportional to rock exposure, probably a closer indicator of rock availability. It is shown that in
many cases formation counts will always correlate with fossil counts, whatever the degree of
sampling. It is not clear, in any case, that these proxies provide a good estimate of what is
missing in the gap between the known fossil record and reality; rather they largely explore the
gap between known and potential fossil records. Further, using simple, single numerical metrics
to correct global-scale raw data, or to model sampling-driven patterns may be premature. There
are perhaps four approaches to exploring the incompleteness of the fossil record, (1) regionalscale studies of geological completeness; (2) regional- or clade-scale studies of sampling completeness using comprehensive measures of sampling, such as numbers of localities or specimens or
fossil quality; (3) phylogenetic and gap-counting methods; and (4) model-based approaches that
compare sampling as one of several explanatory variables with measures of environmental
change, singly and in combination. We suggest that palaeontologists, like other scientists,
should accept that their data are patchy and incomplete, and use appropriate methods to deal
with this issue in each analysis. All that matters is whether the data are adequate for a designated
study or not. A single answer to the question of whether the fossil record is driven by macroevolution or megabias is unlikely ever to emerge because of temporal, geographical, and
taxonomic variance in the data.

The fossil record is far from perfect, and palaeontologists must be concerned about inadequacy and bias
(Raup 1972; Benton 1998; Smith 2001, 2007a).
Fundamental issues concerning the quality and
completeness of the fossil record were enunciated
clearly by Charles Darwin (1859, pp. 287 –288),
who wrote:
That our palæontological collections are very imperfect, is admitted by every one. The remark of that
admirable palæontologist, the late Edward Forbes,
should not be forgotten, namely, that numbers of our
fossil species are known and named from single and
often broken specimens, or from a few specimens collected on some one spot. Only a small portion of the
surface of the earth has been geologically explored,
and no part with sufficient care, as the important discoveries made every year in Europe prove. No organism wholly soft can be preserved. Shells and bones
will decay and disappear when left on the bottom of
the sea, where sediment is not accumulating. . . With

respect to the terrestrial productions which lived
during the Secondary and Palæozoic periods, it is
superfluous to state that our evidence from fossil
remains is fragmentary in an extreme degree.

Raup (1972) clarified the situation when he compared the ‘empirical’ model of Valentine (1969), a
literal reading of the fossil record, with his ‘bias
simulation model’ that explained the bulk of the
apparent low diversity levels of marine invertebrates in the Palaeozoic as a sampling error. Two
opposite viewpoints have been argued, either that
the fossil record is good enough (e.g. Sepkoski
et al. 1981; Benton 1995; Benton et al. 2000;
Stanley 2007) or not good enough (e.g. Raup
1972; Alroy et al. 2001, 2008; Peters & Foote
2002; Alroy 2010) to show the main patterns of
global diversification through time. A resolution
between these opposite viewpoints does not appear
close (Benton 2009; Erwin 2009; Marshall 2010).

From: McGowan, A. J. & Smith, A. B. (eds) Comparing the Geological and Fossil Records: Implications
for Biodiversity Studies. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 358, 63– 94.
DOI: 10.1144/SP358.6 0305-8719/11/$15.00 # The Geological Society of London 2011.

M. J. BENTON ET AL.

Key objective evidence for bias in the fossil
record could be the extraordinary and ubiquitous
correlation of sampling proxies and diversity
curves: why is there such close tracking of measures
of rock volume by palaeodiversity? There are three
possible explanations: (1) rock volume/sampling
drives the diversity signal (Peters & Foote 2001,
2002; Smith 2001, 2007a; Butler et al. 2011); (2)
both signals reflect a third, or ‘common’, cause
such as sea-level fluctuation (Peters 2005; Peters
& Heim 2010); or (3) both signals are entirely or
partially redundant (¼ identical) with each other.
In reality, the close correlation probably reflects a
combination of all three factors in different proportions in any test case, and so it is probably fruitless to prolong the debate about which of the three
models is correct, and which incorrect.
Much of the literature on the quality of the rock
and fossil records has focused on marine settings.
This reflects the interests of palaeontologists
who engage with these questions, and the fact that
many marine rock records are more complete than
most terrestrial (continental) rock records. However, the terrestrial fossil record is worth considering for several reasons: terrestrial life today
is much more diverse than marine life, perhaps
representing 85% of modern biodiversity (May
1990; Vermeij & Grosberg 2010), terrestrial life
includes many major taxa that are sensitive to
atmospheric, temperature, and topographic change
and so are key indicator species in studies of
global change, and for many terrestrial groups
(e.g. angiosperms, insects, vertebrates) there are
mature morphological and molecular phylogenies
that enable cross-comparison between stratigraphic
and cladistic data.
In this paper, we explore the use of sampling
proxies, and suggest that some commonly used
measures, notably formation counts and outcrop
areas, may not be useful or accurate measures of
sampling. Indeed, we suggest that there is probably
no single numerical metric that captures all aspects
of sampling (¼ rock volume, accessibility, effort),
and recent attempts to correct the raw data, or to
model sampling-driven patterns, may be premature.
We then look at some case studies of patchy fossil
records in taxa with good phylogenetic data, and
suggest that in some cases at least the rock volume
and fossil occurrence measures are identical, and
so correlate almost perfectly. Finally, we suggest
that such global-scale confrontations of sampling
proxies and fossil data are not adequate at present,
and recommend instead study-scale approaches to
detect and correct sampling, involving direct evidence for missing data (e.g. Lazarus taxa; ghost
ranges), direct evidence for sampling (e.g. number
of localities or samples per time bin; fossil specimen completeness), and an integrated, model-based

approach to incorporating sampling and explanatory
models into explaining particular diversity curves.

The fossil record, reality and sampling
The fossil record, collector curves and
assessing reality
The known fossil record, meaning our present
understanding as represented by the literature and
museum collections, is a subsample of the potential
fossil record, all the fossils in the rocks, including
undocumented materials (Fig. 1). The potential
fossil record is itself a subsample of all life that
ever existed, or reality, and this includes many softbodied and microscopic organisms that have never
been fossilized and so can never be known.
The difference between the potential fossil
record and reality may be very large (Paul 1988;
Forey et al. 2004). An estimate of this difference
has been made based on the proportion of fossilizable to non-fossilizable modern animals: of 1.2
million living species named at the time, Nichol
(1977) estimated that fewer than 0.1 million (8%)
Reality

unknowable (?)
100%

Number of species

64

50%

Potential fossil record
Known
fossil record

knowable

0%

Log (effort)

Fig. 1. The known and potential fossil record, and
reality. Many sampling methods assess our position on
the collector curve, which tracks the accumulation of
knowledge, assessed against a measure of effort (e.g.
number of specimens, area sampled, number of
person-days work), from no knowledge to complete
knowledge of the potential fossil record. The moving
point shows where current knowledge stands on the
collector curve trajectory. Other methods are required to
assess the difference between the known fossil record
and reality; the proportion of known (or knowable) fossil
record (white) to the unknowable portion of reality (grey)
is entirely hypothetical, and could range from 100%
(where everything is known, or could be found) to
infinitesimal (where nothing, or almost nothing, of
a particular record at a particular level of focus,
taxonomically and stratigraphically, is known); in fact
the potential fossil record could represent about 10% of
reality (Paul 1988; Forey et al. 2004). The collector
curve is traced from its original presentation in Preston
(1948).

ASSESSING THE QUALITY OF THE FOSSIL RECORD

were skeletized, and so potentially preservable as
fossils. This kind of figure has also emerged from
comparisons of organisms preserved in fossil Lagerstätten, such as the Burgess Shale, of which 10 –
15% of species are skeletized, which led Paul
(1988) to suggest that, in normal conditions of preservation, perhaps 10% of Phanerozoic animal
species might be preservable, leaving 90% unknowable, except for hints here and there from softbodied organisms glimpsed in sites of exceptional
preservation. If the proportions of soft-bodied to
hard-bodied organisms have remained constant
through geological time, such an estimate may be
helpful; if, however, the proportion has varied substantially, then even the best-sampled fossil record
may say little about the true global pattern of palaeodiversity through time.
It is assumed that the documented fossil record
is improving, as more fossils are found and as more
researchers investigate and revise earlier work; doubtless some day all fossils in the rocks could be known
scientifically (Maxwell & Benton 1990; Smith 2001;
Forey et al. 2004). Certainly, the rate of naming
of new species in some fossil groups is approaching
saturation, as determined from collector curves
(Preston 1948), where the trajectory has apparently
reached the asymptote region (Fig. 1; e.g. Maxwell
& Benton 1990; Benton & Storrs 1994; Benton
1998, 2008a; Paul 1998; Smith 2007b; Tarver et al.
2007, 2011; Bernard et al. 2010). Further, comparisons of knowledge through research time show that
new finds often do not much affect overall macroevolutionary patterns in broad-scale studies (Maxwell &
Benton 1990; Sepkoski 1993), although more
focused analyses of patchily occurring groups such
as dinosaurs may show changing phylogenetic trees
as new fossils are found (Tarver et al. 2011). In
addition, predicted gaps (e.g. ghost ranges, Lazarus
gaps) are often filled by new fossils, and so congruence of cladograms with the fossil record improves
(Benton & Storrs 1994) or remains static (Benton
2001) at higher taxonomic levels, although new
fossil finds in finer-scale studies can still fill gaps
or create new gaps (Weishampel 1996). Finally,
comparisons (Foote & Raup 1996; Foote & Sepkoski 1999) of the probability of sampling fossil
genera in one, two or three stratigraphic units (the
FreqRat method) with proportions of living families
with a fossil record show that, as expected, some
taxa are apparently well sampled (e.g. ammonoids,
conodonts, brachiopods, bryozoans, echinoids,
ostracods, bivalves) while others are not (e.g. polychaetes, malacostracans). For well-sampled clades,
such as trilobites, bivalves, and mammals, Foote
& Raup (1996) estimated that 60% of actual
species palaeodiversity had been recorded.
Any metric that measures sampling then is a
measure of our trajectory to complete knowledge

65

of the potential fossil record, not of reality, and
this is well understood (e.g. Valentine 1969; Paul
1988; Maxwell & Benton 1990; Peters & Foote
2001; Smith 2001, 2007a; Forey et al. 2004).
However, it might be easy to forget this, and to
assume that comparisons of recorded fossil record
data with sampling proxies provide the true pattern of palaeodiversity. This could only be the case
if the proportions of soft-bodied to hard-bodied taxa
within a clade have remained constant through time,
or if the analyst is referring specifically to a single
well-skeletonized group, such as dinosaurs or brachiopods. Even for statements about single clades,
there are unassessable variables that might make
the potential fossil record depart substantially, or
unpredictably, from reality, especially if certain
key habitats are never, or rarely, sampled. Patchy
sampling by geographical region or by stratigraphic
unit can be detected by comparative analyses (e.g.
Smith 2007b), but the true proportions of different
habitats occupied by members of a clade may
never be known.
Sampling proxies that measure human effort,
such as ‘palaeontological interest units’ (e.g. Raup
1977; Sheehan 1977) only refer to the unknown
part of the potential fossil record. Further, as we
argue below, counts of ‘number of formations’ are
so intimately linked with historical aspects of
species discovery that they too address only the
unknown part of the potential fossil record, and
could hardly be used to predict true palaeodiversities. Indeed, this was suggested by the observation
(Benton 2008a) that the best way to guarantee to
find new genera and species of dinosaurs is to find
new basins/formations. Historical studies of the
pattern of naming of new species of dinosaurs show
that the best determinant of new taxa is the discovery
of new formations, not intensified collecting in known
sedimentary basins. Whereas the discovery curve for
dinosaurs showed evidence of an asymptote ten years
ago (Benton 1998), the subsequent, and continuing,
exploration of new formations in China and South
America has generated a rapid rise in naming of
new species in the past decade (Benton 2008a).
Nevertheless, the collector curve can never extend
beyond the ceiling of the potential fossil record to
explore all the dinosaurian species that once lived
but were never fossilized (Fig. 1).
A number of attempts have been made to estimate the total species richness of dinosaurs, using
a model for estimating future discoveries and
generic longevity (Dodson 1990), using assumptions about species-area relationships (Russell
1995), and using relative abundance plots of rare
to common species within local faunas (Wang &
Dodson 2006). All these methods focus on the
potential fossil record, and do not necessarily identify taxa that have never been preserved.

66

M. J. BENTON ET AL.

Is the ‘unknowable’ part of palaeodiversity
(Fig. 1, grey) forever unknowable? It might be possible to seek approaches or metrics that at least point
to some of the palaeodiversity of soft-bodied organisms or of unpreserved habitats by a variety of
means. Some approaches might be (1) phylogenetic,
using say evidence from a complete molecular phylogeny of living forms to identify likely missing
fossils, (2) stratigraphic, using information about
the known stratigraphic distributions of fossils to
predict those that may have been there but can
never be sampled, (3) geographical, attempting to
identify gaps in fossil distributions, or (4) ecological, perhaps looking at trophic webs or pyramids
to try to pinpoint missing taxa. Some efforts
in this area include comparisons of cladograms
and stratigraphic order of fossils (e.g. Norell &
Novacek 1992; Benton & Storrs 1994; Huelsenbeck
1994; Wills 1999, 2007; Benton et al. 2000), comparison of fossil and molecular estimates of clade
origins to identify durations and distributions of
gaps (e.g. Smith 2007b), and calculation of confidence intervals on stratigraphic ranges of fossils
using known collecting patterns (e.g. Marshall
1990, 1997). None of these approaches, however,
gives an estimate of the difference between the
potential fossil record and reality, merely a proportional measure on comparing two time bins or
geographical regions, or a measure of whether the
difference is likely to be large, or at least likely to
bias the data.
Measures of rock volume might provide
approaches to bridging the gap between the potential fossil record and reality (Fig. 1), but only if
used in models to estimate original areas of habitats
and missing taxa predicted to have occupied such
habitats, but that have not been, or cannot be,
sampled. For example, conservation biologists
identify the niche of a modern species, and then
plot potential geographical distributions according
to the wider distribution of the precise habitats suitable for that species (e.g. Guisan & Zimmermann
2000; Guisan & Thuiller 2005). The assumption is
that the species could occupy all of its potential
habitat if human and other historical pressures did
not prevent it. Such techniques might be used by
palaeontologists to identify ‘missing species’ by
combining rock volume data with palaeogeographical maps, and such hypothetical missing species
could fall in the potentially knowable or unknowable zones (Fig. 1).

Sampling
Sampling is a set of statistical procedures to explore
how subsets of individual observations within a
population of individuals may yield wider knowledge about the population of concern, especially

for the purpose of making predictions based on statistical inference. In the context of the fossil record,
sampling can refer to two research themes, (1) the
choice of subsamples of a greater whole as a practical means to determine aspects of the wider sample,
and (2) the degree to which the known fossil record
is itself a suitable subsample of the greater whole.
That ‘greater whole’ could be simply the potential
fossil record (Fig. 1), but it is usually assumed to
be reality.
Reasons that the known fossil record falls short
of the potential fossil record or reality are a mix of
geological and human factors (Raup 1972) that
fall into three categories: (1) rock volume, the progressive geological bias against preservation and
discovery of ever-older fossils (diagenesis, metamorphism, erosion, covering by younger rocks);
(2) accessibility, the currently available rock area
or volume; and (3) effort, human factors, such as
geographical location, ease of access, and subject
interest (by age, location, or fossil group).

Adequacy and applications
An important caveat is that most of the previous
discussions of fossil record completeness have concentrated on bias and sampling as they relate to a
single use of the fossil record, namely to represent
global diversity patterns. Such discussions might,
or might not, have an impact on other uses of the
fossil record, for example in studies of individual lineages or clades, in local- or regional-scale
studies, phylogenetic analyses, ecological studies
of communities, or anatomical and functional
studies. So, an entirely biased fossil record that provides spurious data on the scaling of a global-scale
radiation or mass extinction, might nonetheless
provide numerous near-perfect fossil Lagerstätten
that represent entire fossil communities and individual fossils that provide remarkable anatomical detail
for functional, ecological, and evolutionary studies.
As Donovan & Paul (1998) stated, ‘the fossil record
may be incomplete, but it is entirely adequate for
many and most requirements of palaeontology’.
Benton et al. (2000) made this point in a specific
case, when they showed that age v. clade congruence
is good at the scale of stratigraphic stages and taxonomic families, and shows no time dependence or
bias back through the 550 Ma of the Phanerozoic.
At finer temporal scales, Wills (2007) also showed
constant levels of completeness through most of
the Phanerozoic, but a substantial drop in the
Cambrian and, surprisingly, in the Neogene. These
may be partly ‘edge’ effects, but the Cambrian
drop likely mixes sampling failure combined with
obscure taxa and many soft-bodied forms.
Some observations based on analyses Darwin
could not have predicted might be said to suggest

ASSESSING THE QUALITY OF THE FOSSIL RECORD

that the fossil record, error-ridden and incomplete as
it is, is adequate for many purposes, although none
of these provides evidence that error in the fossil
record is negligible: (1) the order of fossils in the
rocks generally matches closely the order of nodes
in morphological and molecular trees (Norell &
Novacek 1992; Benton & Hitchin 1997); (2) at
coarse scales of observation (families and stratigraphic stages), there is no evidence that this matching becomes worse deeper in time (Benton et al.
2000; Wills 2007); (3) macroevolutionary patterns,
including posited mass extinctions and diversifications, are largely immune to changes in palaeontological knowledge, even over 100 years of research
time (Maxwell & Benton 1990; Sepkoski 1993;
Adrain & Westrop 2000); (4) congruence between
stratigraphy and phylogeny has also been largely
stable through the 20th century, despite an
order-of-magnitude increase in the number of
fossils (Benton 2001); (5) new fossil finds, even of
reputedly poorly sampled groups such as primates
and humans, do not always alter perceptions of evolutionary patterns (Tarver et al. 2011); and (6) new
post-Cambrian Lagerstätten rarely add new families
to existing knowledge, just new species and genera
(Benton et al. 2008).

Sampling proxies
Definition
A sampling proxy is a metric that represents ‘collecting effort’ in some way, the x-axis of the
species v. effort plot (Fig. 1). Such a sampling
proxy should represent some or all of the geological
and human factors that can introduce error into
interpretations of data from the fossil record, typically time series of diversity. The sampling proxy
ought to be a measure of biasing factors such as
rock volume, accessibility, or human effort, and it
should be independent of the signal it seeks to
correct, namely the documented fossil record. This
might seem evident, but it has rarely been demonstrated, or even discussed, especially in the case of
the commonly used universal sampling proxy of formation numbers. Further, sampling proxies generally assess only the difference between the known
and potential fossil records, and probably have
little to say about the unknowable part of reality
(see above).
Sampling proxies can be used in various ways,
(1) to assess whether a fossil record is biased, (2)
to assess the nature of the bias, and (3) to correct
the bias and produce a true evolutionary signal. In
the first two cases, the sampling proxy may be
partial, in that it documents some aspect of rock
volume, accessibility, or human effort. In the third
case, however, if the sampling proxy is to be used

67

as a correction factor or the basis of a sampling-free
model, it should be comprehensive, and so represent
the three key factors of rock volume, accessibility,
and effort. In cases where supposedly error-free
records have been generated and then used to
make statements about evolution (e.g. Peters &
Foote 2001, 2002; Smith 2001; Smith & McGowan
2007; Barrett et al. 2009; Wall et al. 2009; Benson
et al. 2010; Butler et al. 2011), the sampling proxy,
whether formation counts or outcrop areas, was not
demonstrated to encapsulate all, or even most, of
the error signal – this was an assumption. At best,
these papers could be said to have provided
examples of how to identify parts of the fossil
record that cannot be explained by sampling, and
so might be real. At worst, they show very little
because the universal sampling proxies used may
have been partially redundant with the fossil record
they sought to correct (formation counts) or were
uncertain measures of rock volume/accessibility
(outcrop areas). This of course is a criticism of the
assumption that the sampling proxies were universal
and comprehensive, not a claim that the fossil record
is complete and unbiased.
A sampling proxy may be compared for matching with the raw diversity signal in various ways:
(1) visual inspection; (2) correlation or rank order
correlation (e.g. Fröbisch 2008; Barrett et al.
2009; Butler et al. 2009; Benson et al. 2010); (3) rarefaction to equalize sample sizes in each time bin
(e.g. Benton et al. 2004; Lloyd et al. 2008); or
(4) modelling a sampling-predicted diversity pattern based on numbers of formations or relative
map areas, and comparing this with observed
diversity to explore correlations and residuals (e.g.
Peters & Foote 2001, 2002; Smith 2001; Smith &
McGowan 2007; Barrett et al. 2009; Benson et al.
2010; Butler et al. 2011; Mannion et al. 2011;
Lloyd et al. 2011).
There are two commonly used sampling proxies,
outcrop area and numbers of formations, and a third
might be human effort. These three are discussed
here, before assessing the merits of the first two
from some recent studies.

Sampling proxies 1: outcrop (map) area
It has been argued (e.g. Smith 2001, 2007a;
Crampton et al. 2003; Smith & McGowan 2008;
Wall et al. 2009) that map area (¼ area of outcrop)
is a good proxy for sampling. Rocks that cover
large areas of the landscape are likely to have
been much more sampled than those that do not
outcrop widely, so this metric incorporates aspects
of rock volume, rock availability at the surface, and
human factors.
Practitioners of the map area approach have used
a variety of methods. Some (e.g. Wall et al. 2009)

68

M. J. BENTON ET AL.

have extracted information from global-scale summary geological maps (e.g. Ronov 1978, 1994),
although these suffer from enormous generalizations and simplifications both in terms of the ages
of the rocks and their areas. Time divisions in
such studies have necessarily been broad to accommodate the difficulties of welding together information from disparate and uncoordinated national
geological surveys; the OneGeology programme
(http://www.onegeology.org/) which aims to produce a single, comprehensive world geological
map, may help to rectify this. Others have used
maps and memoirs from single countries or groups
of countries (e.g. NW Europe; Smith 2007a;
McGowan & Smith 2008; Smith & McGowan
2007), consulting sheet memoirs to record those stratigraphic units as present that have yielded fossils
belonging to particular zones. A problem with the
latter approach has been that it was used for comparisons of like with unlike (local or regional map
data v. global fossil record). These authors argued
that their approach was valid as errors become negligible once the map sample is as large as 1300 –
Smith & McGowan (2007) showed extremely high
congruence between sampled rock areas through
geological time obtained from France and Spain.
This presumably indicates a considerable amount
of fundamental geology shared between the two
countries, relating to bedrock, topography, and soil
cover, and does not necessarily say much about
accessibility (exposure) or about world geology.
Furthermore, we see no evidence that scaling up
small-scale data that may contain errors and mismatches will necessarily gloss and over-ride those
errors. Nonetheless, when comparing like with like
(the fossil record and geological map areas for
New Zealand), Crampton et al. (2003) found that
outcrop area was a good proxy for sampling
because it correlated closely with number of
collections.
Conclusions from such map area v. palaeodiversity studies have been very different, with some (e.g.
Peters 2005, 2008) arguing that the covariation of
fossil diversity and outcrop areas indicates a
common driver such as sea-level change, others
(e.g. Wall et al. 2009) arguing for a strong bias on
estimates of fossil diversity from outcrop area, and
yet others (e.g. Marx 2009) finding only modest
evidence for an influence of outcrop area on fossil
diversity.
A key issue, perhaps not appreciated fully
before, is that outcrop (¼ map area) is not always
correlated with rock exposure (¼ area of rock
exposed at the surface), but is heavily modified by
overlying deposits and depends on factors such as
topographic elevation and coastal intersection
(Dunhill in press). As a substantial proportion of
outcropping rock is not exposed at the surface, and

fossil specimens can only be recovered easily from
exposed localities, it can be argued that rock
exposure area represents a better proxy for the
amount of sedimentary rock available for study
than outcrop (i.e. map) area. Rock outcrop area
can only be regarded as a good sampling proxy
if it proves to correlate well with current rock
exposure area, and, importantly, to be a good representation of the total historical accessibility of
geological units, through a combination of current
exposure and past collecting opportunities in old
quarries, mines, railway cuttings, and landslips.
Previous difficulties in quantifying the effects of
exposure failure on sampling (Peters & Heim
2010) have been overcome by using remote sensing, in the form of Google EarthTM imagery, and a
Geographic Information System (GIS) to map and
quantify rock exposure accurately on a local scale
(Dunhill 2011).
Dunhill (2011) showed that rock outcrop and
exposure area are not positively correlated across
50 sample localities in England and Wales
(Fig. 2a, b), and a further investigation showed
these results to be consistent with results obtained,
using the same methodology, in New York State
(Dunhill in press). However, after data manipulation, rock outcrop and exposure area did display
positive correlations in data sets from California
and Australia (Dunhill in press), suggesting that
variables such as climate and population density
may have an influence on the amount of rock
exposed at the surface. Further tests showed that
proportional rock exposure is dependent on a
number of variables that are themselves independent of outcrop area, in particular proximity to
the coast, elevation, and bedrock age (Dunhill
2011, in press). Coastal areas exhibit consistently
higher proportional exposure than inland localities
because of constant high erosion regimes. A common pattern in the data was greater proportional
exposure of older bedrock compared to younger
bedrock (Fig. 2d), which might be explained by
the presence of a greater proportion of harder lithologies of Palaeozoic age and more softer, unlithified
sediments of Cenozoic age (Hendy 2009). Areas of
higher elevation, both in inland and coastal areas,
consistently exhibit higher proportional exposure
(Fig. 2c), a result of increased erosion at altitude
and greater exposure in areas of high coastal cliffs
(Dunhill in press). It is apparent that many of the
variables influencing the amount of rock exposed
at the surface are not independent of one another,
with bedrock age and elevation correlating positively in all four sampled regions (Dunhill in
press). This can probably be explained by the
simple fact that older rocks have been around for
longer and have thus had more time to become
uplifted.

ASSESSING THE QUALITY OF THE FOSSIL RECORD

(b)
2 × 105
1.5 × 105
0

0

5 × 104

1 × 105

Exposure (m²)

1.5 × 105
1 × 105
5 × 104

Exposure (m²)

2 × 105

(a)

4 × 105

8 × 105

1.2 × 106

4 × 105

(d)

1.2 × 106

Inland
Coastal

0.3
0.0

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.2

0.3

Exposure:outcrop ratio

0.4

0.4

Inland
Coastal

0.1

Exposure:outcrop ratio

8 × 105
Outcrop (m²)

0.5

0.5

Outcrop (m²)

(c)

69

0

200

400

600

Elevation (m)

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

Mean strata age (Ma)

Fig. 2. Comparisons of outcrop (¼ map area) and exposure, and implications for sampling proxies. (a) Negative
correlation between outcrop and exposure area for all of the sample localities in the England and Wales data set
(Spearman: rs ¼ 20.28, P ¼ 0.05). (b) Lack of correlation between outcrop and exposure area for the England and
Wales data set after areas with zero rock exposure have been removed (Spearman: rs ¼ 0.07, P ¼ 0.68). (c) Correlation
between elevation and exposure:outcrop ratio for all the sample localities in England and Wales (Spearman:
rs ¼ 20.03, P ¼ 0.85), inland localities only (Spearman: rs ¼ 0.72, P , 0.001) and coastal localities only (Spearman:
rs ¼ 0.15, P ¼ 0.47). (d) Correlation between mean strata age and exposure:outcrop ratio for all the sample localities in
England and Wales (Spearman: rs ¼ 0.37, P ¼ 0.009), inland localities only (Spearman: rs ¼ 0.7, P , 0.001) and
coastal localities only (Spearman: rs ¼ 0.11, P ¼ 0.34) (modified from Dunhill 2011).

The fact that outcrop and exposure area do not
consistently correlate across continents, and that
rock exposure appears to be controlled by a
number of variables that are independent of
outcrop area, non-independent of each other, and
inconsistent in their effects across different regions
of the world, suggests the need for further investigation of the value of outcrop (i.e. map) area as a
proxy for sampling. Further, if rock volume is

linked with processes that regulate biodiversity,
through for example sea-level change on continental
shelves (see below, common cause hypothesis), then
it might be advisable to exercise caution in interpreting correlations of rock volume sampling metrics
and fossil diversity, and especially in using such
metrics as the basis for generating a supposedly
sampling-free diversity curve (e.g. Smith 2001,
2007a; Smith & McGowan 2007; Wall et al.

70

M. J. BENTON ET AL.

2009). If, as seems likely (see above), these rock
volume and area measures (outcrop area, exposure
area) assess the potential for future discoveries
(i.e. potential minus known fossil record), rather
than predict into the unknown part of reality
(Fig. 1), then the claim that ‘sampling-free’ palaeodiversity curves can be generated from them is
further put in doubt.

Sampling proxies 2: number of formations
Counts of numbers of geological formations have
been used widely as a sampling proxy (e.g. Peters
& Foote 2001, 2002; Fröbisch 2008; Barrett et al.
2009; Butler et al. 2009; Benson et al. 2010;
Mannion et al. 2011). These authors found close
or very close covariation between numbers of formations and palaeodiversity, and this has generally
been interpreted as evidence for a control by rock
volume on apparent biodiversity. For example,
Barrett et al. (2009), Butler et al. (2009), Benson
et al. (2010), and Mannion et al. (2011) used their
counts of numbers of formations as a measure of
the reality of sampling, and so they modelled
‘sampling-corrected’ global diversity curves, and
based revised interpretations of the history of life
on the residuals.
Counts of numbers of formations may reflect a
combination of some aspects of exposure area,
total thickness, lithological heterogeneity, and
intensity of study, and so they might seem to be
ideal sampling proxies that encapsulate elements
of rock volume, accessibility, and human effort
(Peters & Foote 2001). However, formation counts
have been widely criticized as sampling proxies
because:
(1)

(2)

(3)
(4)

Their definitions are arbitrary, being human
inventions. The thickness, duration, area
covered, and heterogeneity may depend on
the customs of geologists, whether by nationality or by main research subject-area, as well
as on the recency of revision and definition of
formal formation names (Upchurch & Barrett
2005; Peters & Heim 2010).
They do not generally correlate with rock
exposure area measurements (Dunhill 2011,
in press), which at least offer the simplest
guide to accessibility, even though they do
not offer a single universal sampling proxy.
They do not necessarily correlate with collection effort (Crampton et al. 2003), but see
Upchurch et al. (2011).
They may largely reflect rock heterogeneity
(Crampton et al. 2003; Smith 2007a), such
that highly varied sediments lead to more
and thinner formations, whereas formations
are much thicker when the rock types are

(5)

(6)

unchanging over long time spans, for
example, continental red beds or Chalk.
Importantly, they may also depend on fossil
abundance and diversity (Wignall & Benton
1999): if fossils are highly abundant and
diverse, formations may be subdivided more
finely than if fossils are sparse or absent.
This means that formation counts are not
necessarily independent of the signal they
seek to test or correct.
Formations vary enormously in scale: formations vary over several orders of magnitude in thickness and geographical area (e.g.
Williams 1901; Peters 2006; Peters & Heim
2010). At the smaller end of the scale are
formations within well-studied and highly fossiliferous divisions of the Jurassic or Carboniferous of England that are only metres thick
and cover only a few square kilometres. For
example, the Beacon Limestone Formation
(Lower Jurassic) of the southern UK, reaches
a maximum thickness of 5 m (Cox et al.
1999), but is typically less than 1 m thick
(Simms et al. 2004) with an outcrop coverage
of around 20 km2 (BGS digital bedrock
geology DiGMapGB-50 of the UK), so representing a maximum volume of 0.073 km3. At
the other end of the scale are units such as
the Late Jurassic Morrison Formation of the
Midwestern United States that is up to 150 m
thick and covers an area of 1.5 million square
kilometres (Carpenter 1997), equivalent to a
maximum volume of 225 000 km3. These
two examples show eight orders of magnitude
difference in rock volume of named formations that might otherwise be treated as
equivalent sampling units.

A further issue with the use of formation counts as a
measure of sampling is that analysts usually count
only fossiliferous formations, not all possible formations. Therefore, anything that means organisms
are rare and so not fossilized will reduce the fossiliferous formation count, while this figure will rise
when fossils are common and abundant. A particular
example might be the time bin following a mass
extinction, where palaeontologists might recover
low numbers of fossils, and indeed those low
sample sizes correspond to low numbers of fossiliferous formations. But this does not necessarily
indicate sampling bias (Wignall & Benton 1999;
contra Smith 2001, 2007a, b). Perhaps organisms
were truly rare following the mass extinction; therefore fossils are not often found, and so rare fossils
mean low numbers of fossiliferous formations. But
this is a reversal of the normal sampling assumption.
Here fossils determine formation numbers, not the
other way round. Smith (2001, p. 355) argued that

ASSESSING THE QUALITY OF THE FOSSIL RECORD

such a phenomenon could not occur: ‘Taxon
absences arise because of lack of habitat continuity
and/or changing preservational opportunity in the
fossil record, not as a result of fluctuating abundance
within a uniformly sampled habitat.’ Peters & Heim
(2010) note, however, that absence of fossils in
a stratigraphic unit can reflect sampling failure,
human error in reporting, or true absence. Preservation failure is doubtless often the case, but there
is no fundamental reason why abundance and diversity of organisms in their communities cannot be
reflected in the fossil record.
There are three ways to document the fossiliferous formation count (FFC): a strict FFC, consisting
of only those formations that have produced named
fossils included in the diversity measure; a wider
FFC consisting of all formations that have ever produced any kind of fossil of the group in question,
whether named, unidentified elements, or trace
fossils; and a comprehensive FFC that includes all
formations of the correct facies that have produced,
or might produce fossils of the group in question.
This allows for future finds, but also documents formations that could contain fossils of the group in
question, but do not, and so includes failure of
sampling (Wignall & Benton 1999). The need for
a wider definition of FFCs was noted by Upchurch
& Barrett (2005), when they suggested that a
count of dinosaur-bearing formations (DBFs), as
used in Barrett et al. (2009), and other papers,
ought to subsequently sample as widely as possible
and include all possible opportunities to observe.
The strict FFC fails as a sampling proxy because
it can only assess the difference between the potential and known fossil records (Fig. 1), and nearly
always shows strong correlation with palaeodiversity (see below). A wider or comprehensive FFC
allows some view into the unknown portion of
reality (Fig. 1): for example, in assessing sampling
of bird fossils, a comprehensive FFC of all
vertebrate-bearing formations will show many that
could well have sampled bird fossils, but that
entirely lack them, and so can give a proportion of
what is missing. However, what is not assessed are
the times and places where birds lived in the past,
but where rock was not accumulating or has not survived (and so there are no geological formations).

Sampling proxies 3: human effort
Human factors are doubtless hugely important in
determining our knowledge of the fossil record,
the difference between potential and known
(Fig. 1). These human factors were explored
especially following Raup’s (1972) paper. For
example, Sheehan (1977) defined the Paleontologic
Interest Unit (PIU) as a measure of the effort
devoted to acquiring knowledge, counted in

71

numbers of people, years, or publications on a particular subject, such as fossils of a specified geological interval or taxonomic group. These showed
considerable mismatches in terms of effort per
million years with, for example, eight times as
many palaeontologists (per million years) working
on Cenozoic fossils as on Cambrian fossils
(Sheehan 1977). Further, it is well understood that
the fossils of certain continents have been more
intensively collected and studied than those from
other continents (e.g. Kiessling 2005; McGowan &
Smith 2008) as is confirmed by comparisons of
collector curves, where numbers of new taxa identified from Europe and North America have reached
an asymptote for many taxa, such as dinosaurs
(Benton 1998, 2008a), conodonts (Wickström &
Donoghue 2005), echinoids (Smith 2007b), trilobites (Tarver et al. 2007), and basal tetrapods
(Bernard et al. 2010), whereas new taxa from other
continents are still on the rising phase of the curve.
The idea of using a measure of human effort as a
sampling proxy is reflected in the fossil collections
data of the Paleobiology Database (PaleoDB;
Alroy et al. 2001, 2008; Butler et al. 2011), where
each collection is an assemblage of fossils collected
from a particular formation often by a single
palaeontologist or team. Formations with many
reported collections then have been very actively
sampled. Other measures of effort, as indicated by
Sheehan (1977), such as numbers of palaeontologists or numbers of published papers, have proved
hard to turn into an acceptable correction algorithm.
Further, it would be hard to distinguish whether
human factors drive or follow the data: perhaps concentrations of workers reflect abundant and diverse
fossils (Raup 1977; Purnell & Donoghue 2005).
Until a way can be found to disentangle the direction
of causation between human effort and fossil
diversity, PIUs may fail as a correction for error in
the fossil record because of the probable intimate
interconnection of both signals. Further, of course,
these measures only assess our current position on
the collector curve trajectory to complete knowledge of the potential fossil record (Fig. 1). Other
measures of ‘effort’ though, such as numbers of collections, numbers of sampled localities, numbers
of individual fossils (for rarer groups), or specimen
quality (e.g. Benton et al. 2004; Smith 2007b)
may provide useful insights into sampling of
reality (see below).

Bias, common cause or redundancy
Models
Many measures of palaeodiversity and of rock
volume show long-term covariation through geological time. Rock volume per million years

72

M. J. BENTON ET AL.

increases towards the present day (Raup 1976;
Smith 2001, 2007a), as does geological completeness of palaeontological sampling (Peters & Heim
2010). Further, there are substantial rises and falls
in rock volume per million years within any selected
time span, resulting from sea-level change (Smith
2001, 2007a; Peters 2005). Generally, the apparent
diversity of marine animals follows both of these
signals (Smith 2001), rising from the Cambrian
onwards and rising and falling in line with sea-level
rises and falls, except in the past 100 Ma, when sealevels have generally fallen while marine diversity
has risen. Terrestrial diversity likewise correlates
with rock volume (Kalmar & Currie 2010), although
causes of variations in rock volume for continental
habitats are complex.
The close covariation of rock volume and
palaeodiversity (Smith 2001, 2007a; Smith &
McGowan 2007, 2008), and counts of geological
formations (Peters & Foote 2001, 2002; Fröbisch
2008; Barrett et al. 2009; Butler et al. 2009; Wall
et al. 2009; Benson et al. 2010) or sequence stratigraphic rock packets (Peters 2005, 2008; Peters &
Heim 2010) can be interpreted in various ways,
namely (1) rock bias; (2) common cause; and
(3) redundancy.
The rock bias hypothesis is that the fossil record
is wholly or partly a result of sampling bias, primarily determined by rock volume and accessibility
(e.g. Raup 1972; Peters & Foote 2001, 2002;
Smith 2001, 2007a; Smith & McGowan 2007;
Fröbisch 2008; Barrett et al. 2009). In simple
terms, the more rock, the more fossils (combining
aspects of all three biasing factors – rock volume,
accessibility, and human effort). Low volumes of
rock (low outcrop area or low numbers of formations) means fossils cannot be found and so low
fossil diversity is interpreted as sampling failure.
The implication is that more intensive search of
these formations, or ideally the discovery of new
formations or areas of a poorly sampled time interval then ought to yield fossils at a faster rate than
those from a well-sampled time bin.
The common cause hypothesis (the ‘biologically
driven’ model of Smith 2001; Peters 2005, 2008) is
that measures of rock volume and fossil diversity or
abundance are correlated because they are driven by
a third, common cause, such as sea-level change. It
could be that biodiversity is driven by rock volume,
so that marine life is much more diverse at times of
rapid sedimentation (wide continental shelves; high
habitat heterogeneity; high productivity, with much
organic matter swept in from the land) than at times
of low sedimentation (narrow continental shelves;
low habitat heterogeneity; low productivity). The
expanding and contracting marine shelf then
drives expansions and contractions in marine biodiversity, which is dominated by the portion that

occupies continental shelves, a kind of species-area
effect (Smith 2001). Sea-level has also been posited
as a driver of terrestrial diversity (e.g. Smith 2001;
Mannion & Upchurch 2010), with high sea-levels
corresponding either to low terrestrial diversity
because of smaller land areas and fewer opportunities for preservation of habitats (Markwick 1998;
Smith 2001) or to high terrestrial diversity because
of more islands, leading to more endemism, as
well as more chances for skeletons to fall into
aquatic habitats and for coastal habitats to be
swamped by the sea (Haubold 1990; Mannion
et al. 2011). However, these suggestions are not supported by evidence from the Cretaceous terrestrial
record (Fara 2002), and, although terrestrial diversity correlates with rock volume (Kalmar & Currie
2010), it is not clear how the volume of terrestrial
clastic sediment could relate to sea-level (Butler
et al. 2011).
The redundancy hypothesis, proposed here, is
that in many cases the supposed sampling proxy
and the fossil record are to a greater or lesser
extent redundant with each other. This is especially
true when the fossil record is patchy, perhaps for
birds or pterosaurs – each fossil find adds a new fossiliferous formation to the roster. In such cases (e.g.
Butler et al. 2009), the correlation between fossil
count and formation count will be nearly perfect.
The simplest ‘correction’, where number of fossil
taxa is divided by number of formations will yield
a flat line, as found by Lloyd et al. (2008) when
they subsampled numbers of dinosaur species by
dinosaur localities through 12 Mesozoic time bins.
But such a confrontation of two redundant signals
says nothing about sampling or the true unbiased
pattern.
We now present re-analyses of two recently
published studies, one on anomodonts and one on
pterosaurs, to explore situations where bias (or
‘megabias’) was claimed, but where the supposed
sampling proxy is really redundant with the palaeontological diversity signal.

Anomodonts: redundancy of data and
sampling proxy
As noted earlier, it is important to consider the kind
of formation count employed, whether the strict,
wider, or comprehensive fossiliferous formation
count (FFC). We explore the effects of using these
three variants in a recent study of anomodont diversity through the Permian and Triassic (Fröbisch
2008). Fröbisch (2008, 2009) divided the fossil
record of anomodonts into a variety of time bins:
land vertebrate faunachrons (LVFs), standard marine
stages, and million-year divisions. The LVFs were
his first determination of ages, and the others were

ASSESSING THE QUALITY OF THE FOSSIL RECORD

derived from them, so the test here focuses on the
LVFs. All 128 anomodont species were assigned
to the 13 LVFs according to data from Fröbisch’s
(2008) paper, and the numbers of anomodontbearing formations for each time bin were listed
(Table 1). In addition, the numbers of named stratigraphic units with any tetrapod fossils were also
listed, based on unpublished data from Benton
et al. (2004), Sahney & Benton (2008), Sahney et al.
(2010), and other sources. As Fröbisch (2008)
found, the time series of anomodont species diversity correlates significantly with the time series of
anomodont-bearing formations, but not with the
time series of all tetrapod-bearing formations, with
which anomodont diversity shows a negative, but
not significant, correlation (Fig. 3; Table 2).
In order to test further whether the strict FFC
could ever be an independent sampling proxy for
‘diversity of X’, a series of randomized trials was
carried out to see whether it would be possible to
break the strong correlation of time series of anomodont species diversity with number of anomodontbearing formations. The numbers of recorded
formations per time bin (Table 1) were used as a
starting point. For each of the 84 anomodontbearing formations reported in Fröbisch (2008), a
total species diversity from 0 –5 was generated
using random numbers – the minimum of 0 allows
for no finds in a formation, and 5 is the maximum reported, for the Gamkan 1 time interval, in
Fröbisch (2008). These were summed for each
time bin according to the reported numbers of formations, and forty simulations were performed, sufficient to assess the statistical significance of the

73

results at the 95% level for a two-tailed test (95%
probability ¼ 1 in 20; ! 2 for a two-tailed test).
Remarkably, the simulated anomodont totals and
the actual numbers of anomodont-bearing formations were significantly correlated in all but
three cases (Table 2). In fact these randomized
trials gave rank correlation values in a tight range
around a mean and mode of 0.60, identical to the
actual value obtained by Fröbisch (2008), and with
significance values equal to or slightly better than
in the real example (Table 2). This suggests not
only that random data can produce results similar
to those found with real data, but that this will
occur most of the time. Hence, it is probably impossible ever to find a non-significant relationship
between time series of sparsely occurring fossils
and their strict FFC, and so the discovery of such a
correlation in such cases says nothing about
sampling, quality of the fossil record, or megabiases.
In order to avoid any spurious correlations
arising from autocorrelation within the time series,
the data were detrended by taking first differences
of anomodont diversity and formation numbers,
and these confirmed the significant correlation of
changes in anomodont diversity and changes in
strict FFC, but an absence of correlation of changes
in anomodont diversity and changes in the comprehensive FFC (Table 2). The same is true also for
generalized differencing (GD), a more comprehensive technique that incorporates detrending and
differencing but modulates the differences by the
strength of the correlation between successive data
points (McKinney 1990). The GD results show a
highly significant correlation between numbers of

Table 1. Comparison of diversity of anomodont fossils through 13 time bins, spanning from the Middle
Permian (bottom) to Late Permian
Stage
Nor(l)
Crn(u)
Crn(m)
Lad(u)-Crn(l)
Ans(u)-Lad(l)
Ole(u)-Ans(l)
Ind-Ole(l)
Chx(m-u)
Wuc(u)-Chx(l)
Wuc(m)
Cap(u)-Wuc(l)
Cap(l-m)
Wor

Lucas LVF
Revueltian
Adamanian
Otischalkian
Berdvankian
Perovkan
Nonesian
Lootsbergian
Platbergian
Steilkransian
Hoedemakeran
Gamkan II
Gamkan I
Kapteinskraalian

Karoo LVF

Myr

Anomodont
species

Anomodontbearing fms

All
fmns

Cynognathus C
Cynognathus A, B
Lystrosaurus
Dicynodon
Cistecephalus
Tropidostoma
Pristerognathus
Tapinocephalus
Eodicynodon

2
3.5
2.5
5
4
6.5
2.5
3
1.5
2.5
2
4.5
2

2
2
2
3
23
13
9
34
27
16
7
13
5

2
2
3
6
8
13
8
12
6
8
4
3
2

16
17
17
31
40
59
49
8
16
15
11
11
15

Standard stratigraphic stages, and two systems of Land Vertebrate Faunachrons (LVF) are given, as well as durations of these intervals, in
Myr (millions of years). The Dicynodont-bearing formations (fmns) are those from Fröbisch (2008) that yielded anomodont fossils,
whereas ‘All formations’ are all named stratigraphic units that have yielded any kind of fossil tetrapod remains. Stage-name abbreviations: Ans, Anisian; Cap, Capitanian; Chx, Changhsingian; Crn, Carnian; Ind, Induan; Lad, Ladinian; Nor, Norian; Ole, Olenekian;
Wor, Wordian; Wuc, Wuchiapingian.

74

M. J. BENTON ET AL.
70

Dicynodon, and Cynognathus C Zone times when
the comprehensive FFC was relatively low (Fig. 3).

P Tr

Number of formations

60
50
40

Pterosaurs: redundancy and the
Lagerstätten effect

comprehensive
FFC

anomodont
diversity

30
20
10

strict FFC

0
265

255

245

235

225

Geological time (Myr)
Fig. 3. Diversity of anomodont species through the
Permo-Triassic, showing the close matching of the
time series for anomodont diversity (black line) and
anomodont-bearing formations (grey line; strict FFC).
The time series for all tetrapod-bearing formations
(dashed line; comprehensive FFC) follows a rather
different course. The Permo-Triassic (P-Tr) boundary is
indicated by a vertical line. Based on data in Fröbisch
(2008, 2009), and unpublished.

anomodont species and the strict FFC, but a highly
insignificant negative correlation with the comprehensive FFC.
As a non-independent metric, these results
suggest that anomodont FFC cannot be used as a
sampling proxy or correcting factor for the time
series of anomodont genera because the two
signals are essentially identical. Much more fruitful
would be to compare the diversities of anomodonts
with total numbers of tetrapod-bearing formations
(Table 2), and to seek to understand why, for
example, anomodonts were apparently highly
diverse during Tapinocephalus, Cistecephalus,

The fossil record of pterosaurs is an extreme
example of episodicity (Barrett et al. 2008; Butler
et al. 2009), where a dozen or so Lagerstätten,
such as the Late Triassic Zorzino Limestone of
North Italy, the Late Jurassic Solnhofen Limestone
of Germany, the Early Cretaceous Santana Formation of Brazil and the Jehol Group of China,
and the Late Cretaceous Niobrara Chalk Formation
of North America account for more than half the
species and genera of pterosaurs ever recorded.
This gives the time series of pterosaur species occurrences a spiky appearance (Fig. 4a), each peak
representing one or more Lagerstätten.
When the data are detrended and normalized,
the strong correlation between pterosaur-bearing
formations and pterosaur diversity remains with
first differences (FD), but becomes a highly nonsignificant negative correlation with generalized
differencing (GD; Table 3). This mixed finding
suggests that much of the correlation between pterosaur palaeodiversity and pterosaur-bearing formations may relate to the overall trend (GD), but
the surviving correlation with FD may be a trivial
result because the count of pterosaur-bearing
formations (PBF) is not a comprehensive FFC (it
includes formations from which named pterosaurs
were found as well as others that yielded pterosaur
fragments), and so both curves are intimately
linked, each documenting the same episodic preservation of fossils, and it cannot be said that one metric
explains the other. The key question is whether
a patchy fossil record such as this is simply tied to
the Lagerstätten, or might also reflect some wider
dependence on rock volume or accessibility.

Table 2. Correlations of anomodont species diversity through time with different
proxies for formation numbers, showing rank-order correlations for the raw data
and for first differences (FD) and generalized differences (GD)

Anomodont-bearing formations
Randomized species numbers (n ¼ 40)
Mode
Mean
FD anomodont-bearing formations
GD anomodont-bearing formations
All tetrapod-bearing formations
FD all tetrapod-bearing formations
GD all tetrapod-bearing formations

Spearman’s r

P

0.60
0.53– 0.66
0.60
0.60
0.58
0.76
20.22
20.13
20.12

0.034*
0.015* 2 0.062
0.029*
0.033*
0.041*
0.006**
0.472
0.646
0.716

Probabilities (P) for each correlation measure are given, and these are marked as significant (P , 0.5*)
and highly significant (P , 0.005**).

ASSESSING THE QUALITY OF THE FOSSIL RECORD

75

Table 3. Correlation of phylogenetically corrected diversity estimate (PDE) for species of pterosaurs (actual
records plus ghost ranges), from Butler et al. (2009) with number of pterosaur-bearing formations (PBFs) from
Butler et al. (2009), counted as raw data, log10 of raw values, to create a normal distribution of the data, and
first differences (FD) to detrend the data, and divided by substage duration (@t) to standardize for time.
Comparisons are also made of raw pterosaur counts (TDE) and PDE with dinosaur-bearing collections (DBC)
and dinosaur-bearing formations (DBF), as raw data and log10-tranformed data, both from Butler et al. (2011),
to approximate a comprehensive FFC

PDE v. PBF
log10 (PDE v. PBF)
FD (PDE v. PBF)
GD (PDE v. PBF)
FD/@t (PDE v. PBF)
TDE v. DBC
TDE v. DBF
log10 (TDE v. DBC)
log10 (TDE v. DBF)
PDE v. DBC
PDE v. DBF
log10 (PDE v. DBC)
log10 (PDE v. DBF)

Pearson’s r

P

Spearman’s r

P

Kendall’s t

P

0.61
0.49
0.40
20.05
0.97
0.32
0.49
0.60
0.59
0.08
0.20
0.21
0.14

0**
0**
0**
0.645
0**
0.113
0.012*
0.001**
0.002**
0.699
0.319
0.313
0.499

0.56
0.56
0.34
20.09
0.35
0.64
0.54
0.65
0.55
0.37
0.21
0.36
0.20

0**
0**
0**
0.429
0**
0**
0.004**
0**
0.004**
0.061
0.314
0.068
0.333

0.46
0.46
0.30
20.07
0.29
0.51
0.41
0.48
0.42
0.31
0.17
0.31
0.17

0**
0**
0.002**
0.406
0.002**
0**
0.005*
0.001**
0.004**
0.032*
0.238
0.034*
0.246

Probabilities (P) for each correlation measure are given, and these are marked as significant (P , 0.5*) and highly significant
(P , 0.005**).

If the measure of rock volume had been a comprehensive one, such as ‘all fossiliferous Mesozoic
rock units’ or ‘all Mesozoic rock units with vertebrate fossils’, then the sampling measure would
be less evidently redundant with the pterosaur
fossil record. In this study, we chose counts of all
dinosaur-bearing formations and all dinosaur collections from the PaleoDB, as given by Butler et al.
(2011), as proxies for comprehensive FFCs
(Fig. 5). Correlations are strong with the raw diversity measure (TDE), but limited with the phylogenetically corrected measure (PDE) (Table 3; Fig. 5).
For the raw data, all three correlation measures
yielded largely significant results, although the
strict correlation (Pearson) provides generally less
significant results than the rank-based measures
(Spearman, Kendall). This suggests, perhaps surprisingly, that there is a sampling signal linked to
the wider availability of suitable rocks through the
Mesozoic, lying behind the dominant sampling
signal from the small number of crucial Lagerstätten. Interestingly, linear correlations were very
poor (Pearson’s r), rank-order correlations were
poor (Spearman’s r), and yet the phylogenetically
corrected pterosaur numbers and dinosaur-bearing
collections showed some evidence that rises and
falls were in phase with each other (Kendall’s t).
This study confirms that the pterosaur fossil record
is dominated by ten or twelve Lagerstätten, as
already shown, but that the Mesozoic record of
fossiliferous units (whether DBF or DBC) apparently follows the pattern of occurrence of those

Lagerstätten, and so covaries with the pterosaur
palaeodiversity curve to some extent as well
(Fig. 5); in other words, and unexpectedly, the concentration of Lagerstätten in the Late Triassic, late
Jurassic, and mid Cretaceous matches times of high
numbers of dinosaur collections in the PaleoDB.
To return to the Butler et al. (2009) paper, it is
not, however, clear what the modelled pterosaur
diversity curve, with wider FFC removed, actually
documents (Fig. 4a): it is hardly a ‘true’ or corrected global signal of pterosaurian palaeodiversity
because Lagerstätten and rock volume have nothing to do with each other. In other words, if a particular fossil record is dominated by Lagerstätten,
rock volume and diversity need not correlate. If
there had been a clear correlation between number
of formations and palaeodiversity, so that each
spike in diversity really averaged out across
several formations or localities, then this would
not be a record dominated by Lagerstätten. Both
could occur at the same time, with rock volume
and palaeodiversity rising and falling together and,
on top of that, times of particularly high diversity
might be made even more pronounced by the presence of one or more Lagerstätten. However, these
are two separate things – Lagerstätten are rich in
fossils, not rich in rock.
If this is the case, then a fossil record dominated
by Lagerstätten, such as that of pterosaurs, is largely
determined by intimate details of how each extraordinarily rich deposit is exploited – the ‘Jehol
peak’ (Aptian– Albian), for example, was zero a

76

M. J. BENTON ET AL.

(a) 40

40

35

35
30

Diversity

30

25

25

1400

DBCs
DBFs

1200

Pterosaur species

1000

PDE

20

800

15

600

15

10

400

10

5

200

5

0
250

20

0
215

165

115

65

(b) 40
35
30

Diversity

1600

25
20
15
10
5
0

215

165

115

65

Geological time (Myr)
Fig. 4. Diversity of pterosaur species through the
Mesozoic. (a) Raw species count (solid black line),
modelled species diversity, with the effect of number of
formations removed (dashed line), and five-point moving
average (grey line). (b) Raw species diversity according
to a 2008 data base (solid black line), and based on the
number of pterosaurian taxa named before 1990 (dashed
line). Data from Barrett et al. (2008) and Butler et al.
(2009).

few years ago (Fig. 4b), and now consists of 20 pterosaur species, and soon might reach 25 or 30, or it
might fall if [sp.] taxonomic revisions reveal some
synonymy of species names. The Jehol peak is
founded on the fossil contents of two formations,
the Yixian and Jiufotang, in NE China. The raw
data, and the modelled sampling time series, are
equally dependent on the current state of research,
and so neither can ‘correct’ the other. This can be
illustrated by stripping the raw data back to the position at the end of 1989 – all post-1990 finds are
excluded from the Barrett et al. (2008) data base,
and the high peaks in particular are substantially
reduced (Fig. 4b). This removal of the past 20
years of research effort effectively halves the total

0
200

150

Geological time (Myr)

100

50

Fig. 5. Covariance of pterosaur diversity and wider
sampling measures, the number of dinosaur collections
in the PaleoDB (DBC) and the number of
dinosaur-bearing formations (DBF). The DBC measure
in particular shows a spiky pattern, with highs in the Late
Jurassic (Kimmeridgian, Tithonian), mid Cretaceous
(Aptian, Albian), and latest Cretaceous (Campanian,
Maastrichtian). The first two of these peaks correspond to
times of pteroaur-bearing Lagerstätten, and this is
highlighted especially in the raw pterosaur
palaeodiversity measure (TDE), but much less so in the
phylogenetically corrected measure, including ghost
ranges (PDE). Correlation measures are shown in
Table 3.

number of pterosaur species known (from 118
today to 66 at the end of 1989), but 20 of the 52
species removed come from the Yixian and Jiufotang formations of China, eight from the Crato and
Santana formations of Brazil, and the remainder
scattered throughout other less productive localities.
The great majority of new finds reported since 1990
are from previously known formations, and most are
from a small number of Lagerstätten. The shape of
the diversity time series, whether based on raw or
modelled data, in a Lagerstätten-driven signal such
as the pterosaur fossil record, is dependent more
on intensity of collecting in known Lagerstätten
rather than the number and distribution of those
fossil-bearing formations. Further, at any time a
new Lagerstätte may be found or exploited, as the
Jehol Group formations were in the 1990s, and the
addition of numerous fossil taxa corresponds to
only a comparatively trivial addition to the FFC,
the basis of the modelling approach employed by
Butler et al. (2009).
Is there any meaningful way to turn such a
Lagerstätten-driven fossil record into a samplingfree distribution? One might apply various techniques to reduce the spikiness of the plot, such as
reading only the residuals after formation numbers
have been considered, or rarefying, or shareholder
quorum sampling (Alroy 2010), although the latter
two are likely to return a flat line. The modelling

ASSESSING THE QUALITY OF THE FOSSIL RECORD

approach (Smith & McGowan 2007) is to rank the
species and number of formations time series, calculate their straight-line relationship ( y ¼ 1.1076x –
4.1948, in this case; Butler et al. 2009), then apply
a correction by subtracting this modelled diversity
estimate (MDE) from the observed diversity estimate (TDE) for the time bin, that is assuming that
true diversity is constant and observed diversity is
driven entirely by sampling. The modelled diversity
estimates track the raw data closely for much of
the signal (Fig. 4a), but lie below or above in
places, so suggesting the influence of factors other
than sampling on the signal (Butler et al. 2009).
However, as noted, this method has not accounted
for sampling, and it has probably removed much
real diversity signal.
A second approach might be to seek to smooth
the spikiness of the species diversity time series.
This has already been done to some extent in the
lumping approach taken to the stratigraphic substages, similar to the method employed in Barrett
et al.’s (2009) dinosaur study. For example, the
Yixian Formation is dated by Barrett et al. (2008)
as ‘late Barremian to Aptian’, the Jiufotang Formation as ‘Aptian’, the Crato Formation as ‘late
Aptian to early Albian’, and the Santana Formation
as ‘Aptian –Albian’. These age designations correctly reflect current uncertainties, and they vary
from 2 to 6 substages in duration. Each valid pterosaurian species from those formations was then
scored from 2 to 6 times, depending on the age uncertainty, but this bears no relation to the actual age,
which might eventually turn out to fall entirely
within a single substage for each of the formations.
A similar ‘smearing effect’ could be achieved by
adopting a 5-point moving average, for example
(Fig. 4a), but there is no justification for either
approach. Alternatively, a ‘tightrope’ could be
drawn, linking the high peaks of pterosaurian diversity, based on the assumption that the Lagerstätten
reveal something about the true diversity of pterosaurs at any time. This approach at least avoids the
problem of all sampling standardization techniques
in that they penalize the best fossil records in
favour of the poorest fossil records in a time series.
However, any such corrections are transient, dependent on minute details of the study of a small number
of geological formations, and impossible to interpret, representing as they do sporadic and geographically restricted samples. Probably both approaches
are best avoided with such sporadic fossil records
as that of pterosaurs in that any ‘corrections’ add
levels of uncertainty and hypothesis to an already
uncertain and patchy fossil record. In conclusion,
the pterosaur record is patchy – we know that –
and for phylogenetic interpretation we can identify
weaker and stronger episodes, but statistical manipulations probably add little information.

77

Collector curves and age v. clade metrics
In both studies, the authors (Fröbisch 2008; Butler
et al. 2009) argued that they had demonstrated that
their fossil records were biased. In doing so, they
rejected the common cause hypothesis, and did not
consider the redundancy hypothesis advanced here.
Certainly, we would argue that Fröbisch (2008)
did not demonstrate ‘an obvious rock record bias
affecting the diversity curve of anomodonts during
at least parts of the Permian and Triassic’, nor that
Butler et al. (2009) showed that the pterosaur fossil
record is ‘controlled by geological and taphonomic
megabiases rather than macroevolutionary processes’. Although they are almost certainly right,
their method did not demonstrate what was claimed.
The key point of the redundancy hypothesis is that
it rejects the possibility of using the rock volume
measure as a sampling proxy. It does not address
whether the record is biased or not. Our point is
that the studies by Fröbisch (2008) and Butler et al.
(2009) tell us nothing about whether the fossil
records of anomodonts or pterosaurs are good or
bad – other investigations are needed to assess that.
Nor are we arguing that these two papers are uniquely
uninformative – such assumptions have been made
in many other papers, all of which require careful
reconsideration along the lines we suggest.
Our key concern is that, in cases such as these,
the authors show a ‘corrected’ diversity curve, as
if the error has been removed (e.g. Fröbisch 2008;
Barrett et al. 2009; Butler et al. 2009). And yet,
having failed to distinguish the empirical fossil
record signal from the sampling signal (strict FFC
data for anomodonts; wider FFC data for pterosaurs), the ‘corrected’ curves might represent something closer to the true diversity pattern than the
uncorrected curves, but equally they might not. In
other words, modifying the raw data with information from any measure of FFC, gives a different
pattern of diversity through time, but it is unclear
what is represented.
Something more can be said about the quality of
the fossil record of anomodonts and pterosaurs.
Even though the formations proxy approach has
said nothing about the quality of these respective
fossil records, there are at least two established
methods that provide some insights, namely collector curves and age v. clade metrics. Collector curves
(¼ species discovery curves) for anomodonts and
pterosaurs show rather different trajectories for
each group (Fig. 6). The anomodonts show a
steady accretion of new species from 1850 to the
present day, close to the pattern of species discovery
detected for North American fossil mammals and
for trilobites. The pterosaurs, on the other hand,
show a rapid accumulation of valid species in the
nineteenth century, relatively faster than for any of

78

M. J. BENTON ET AL.

Percentage of discovered species

100
90
80
70
60

Dinosaur species
Fossil bird species
Trilobite species
Fossil mammals (NA)
Anomodont species
Pterosaur species

50
40
30
20
10
0
1800

1850

1900

1950

2000

Research year

Fig. 6. Collector curves, or species discovery curves, for
several fossil groups, including anomodonts and
pterosaurs. All discovery curves are shown as
percentages, even though final totals, in 2003, are very
different: trilobites (n ¼ 4126), early tetrapods
(n ¼ 515), dinosaurs (n ¼ 694), fossil birds (n ¼ 221),
fossil mammals of North America (n ¼ 3340),
anomodonts (n ¼ 124), and pterosaurs (n ¼ 130). The
50% line marks the ‘half life’ of the discovery curve, the
date by which half the currently valid taxa had
accumulated. Data from these sources: trilobites (Tarver
et al. 2007), dinosaurs (Benton 2008a), fossil birds
(Fountaine et al. 2005), fossil mammals (Alroy 2002),
anomodonts (Fröbisch 2008, 2009), and pterosaurs
(Butler et al. 2009; Dyke et al. 2009).

the other test groups (although note the relatively
small sample size for pterosaurs), and somewhat
akin to the species discovery record of fossil birds,
although beginning much earlier. Fossil birds, dinosaurs, and pterosaurs share a pattern of steeply rising
rates of species discovery since 1970, a pattern not
seen in the other groups. None of the species discovery curves (Fig. 6) shows a convincing asymptote,
although North American fossil mammals come
closest, followed by anomodonts. These observations suggest that the potential anomodont fossil
record is probably better explored than the potential
pterosaur fossil record, confirming the expectation
of most palaeontologists. The collector curve
approach cannot shed any light on how well the
fossil records of these taxa reflect reality (Fig. 1).
An alternative method of exploring quality and
sampling, and one that does have the potential to
compare the fossil record with reality, is to confront
age (stratigraphic) and clade (phylogenetic) data
(Norell & Novacek 1992; Benton & Storrs 1994;
Benton et al. 2000): good congruence between the
two indicates that the phylogeny is reasonably accurate and that the fossil record is good enough to
document fossils in the right order, whereas low
congruence could mean that either the phylogeny
or the fossil record, or both, are at fault. Age
v. clade congruence metrics for anomodonts and

pterosaurs are good, but not exceptional. For example, 13 cladograms of synapsids and therapsids, the
larger clades including anomodonts, have Stratigraphic Consistency Indices (SCI; Huelsenbeck
1994) of 0.60 –0.86 (mean, 0.74), Relative Completeness Indices (RCI; Benton & Storrs 1994) of
66.7 –97.9 (mean, 80.4), and Gap Excess Ratios
(GER; Wills 1999) of 0.50–0.96 (mean, 0.82), all
well above the mean values for a sample of 1000
cladograms of all taxa (Benton et al. 2000), including plants, invertebrates, and vertebrates (SCI, 0.55;
RCI, 31.13; GER, 0.56). In all cases, values of 1.00
(SCI, GER) or 100 (RCI) indicate perfect congruence. In his comparison of anomodont cladograms,
Angielczyk (2002) found a range of RCI values
from 28.2–63.2 (mean, 41.5), and GER values
from 0.68– 0.86 (mean, 076), again well above the
global means, and so suggesting that, at the scale
of genera and stratigraphic stages or substages, the
anomodont fossil record shows better-than-average
congruence with phylogeny. In the case of pterosaurs, Dyke et al. (2009) found RCI of 39.4 and
2102.1, SCI of 0.58 and 0.62, and GER of 0.85
and 0.82 for two cladograms of pterosaurs; apart
from the devastatingly low RCI value for the
second cladogram, which reflects an enormous
amount of ghost range, the values are well above
average, suggesting generally excellent congruence
between the fossil record of pterosaurian genera
and phylogeny.

Exploring fossil record incompleteness
The position reached so far is not that the fossil
record is good or bad, but rather that many of the
global-scale methods used recently to explore the
bias and incompleteness of the fossil record fail in
their core aim. The key question in the minds of
palaeontologists is whether the fossil record is adequate to make a particular macroevolutionary or
palaeobiological study, or not. Two major subsidiary issues are (1) testing the validity of the bias,
common cause, and redundancy hypotheses, and
(2) seeking to correct the empirical fossil record
time series to generate a truer signal.
We consider these two issues first, and then
outline four approaches for exploring error and
bias in the fossil record, (1) regional exploration
of geological completeness; (2) regional and local
exploration of sampling completeness; (3) phylogenetic and gap-counting methods; and (4) modelbased comparison of sampling bias and other
explanatory variables.

Common cause or bias?
Peters (2005, 2008) advanced the common cause
hypothesis as the best explanation for the pervasive

ASSESSING THE QUALITY OF THE FOSSIL RECORD

correlation of fossil and rock volume signals in the
marine realm, and Smith (2007a) argued against it
and for the bias hypothesis. So far, a decisive test
has not been attempted on the global-scale data.
In a more focused study, Butler et al. (2011)
attempted to test between the bias and common
cause hypotheses in the evolution of dinosaurs;
they showed how the various signals are mixed
and indeed how difficult it is to devise a conclusive
test. They found strong correlation among all
metrics, namely between the fossil record signal of
dinosaurian species diversity through time with
measures of sampling (dinosaur-bearing collections
from the PaleoDB, and dinosaur localities), and with
measures of sea-level (two sea-level curves, estimated non-marine surface areas). The results
became clearer after detrending, when the strong
linkage between diversity and the sampling
measures was confirmed, but not with the sea-level
measures. They rejected the ‘terrestrial common
cause hypothesis’ and they considered ‘variation
in sampling to be the preferred null hypothesis for
short-term diversity variation in the Mesozoic terrestrial realm.’ This is still suggestive, however, as
Butler et al. (2011) acknowledge, when they add
that ‘The long-term trend towards increased
sampling and dinosaur taxic diversity through the
Mesozoic may result from a genuine increase in
dinosaur diversity through this time period,
increased opportunities to sample dinosaurs in
younger rocks, or a combination of these two
factors.’ When numerous metrics covary in different
ways and to varying degrees, it is hard to reject the
influence of one or other factor.
A further issue with this study is that one ‘terrestrial common cause’ model has been rejected, but
others almost certainly exist: is the terrestrial rock
record and biodiversity driven by sea-level, continental area, mountain building, rifting, or climate
change? All could affect rock volume and biodiversity. Most likely, habitable areas on land are determined by a combination of these factors, and
terrestrial biodiversity may be influenced by a combination of such physical environmental drivers as
these, as well as opportunism and the evolution of
novel adaptations (e.g. the evolution of the ability
to fly in pterosaurs and birds), and so it would be
hard to capture such complexity in a comparison
of diversity and physical signals.

Correcting the fossil record for sampling
Attempts have been made to correct the raw fossil
record data with evidence from sampling proxies,
namely outcrop areas (e.g. Smith 2001; Smith &
McGowan 2007; Wall et al. 2009) or formation
counts (e.g. Barrett et al. 2009; Benson et al.
2010; Butler et al. 2010). In these cases, the

79

method calculates a modelled diversity estimate
that represents the diversity expected if observed
diversity variations result solely from the correcting
factor (outcrop area or formation count). Diversity
residuals (i.e. the differences between modelled
diversity values and actual diversity values) following correction for sampling then provide the supposedly sampling-free signal that may represent
genuine biological signal, or may be explained in
other ways. Note, however, that the ‘sampling-free’
residuals left after sampling standardization by
outcrop areas differ in the studies by Smith &
McGowan (2007) and Wall et al. (2009), as a
result of the different palaeodiversity estimates
and the different metrics of outcrop area used by
both teams. It is not clear then which of these two
‘corrected’ curves is likely to be more informative
about the true palaeodiversity signal, or whether in
fact either of them is closer to the truth than the
empirical data.
We have presented evidence above that number
of formations is a poor global sampling proxy
because of huge variations in the scale and definition
of formations, and because formations document
sediment and fossil heterogeneity and so are not
independent of the signal they seek to correct.
Further, map (¼ outcrop) area may also be suspect
as a global sampling proxy because it does not
always correspond to exposure area, perhaps a
closer measure of rock availability (Dunhill 2011,
in press). Therefore, these proxies on their own
may be inadequate as simple correction metrics,
and yet they might be elaborated to assess rock
volume, accessibility, and human effort by the
use of alternative metrics such as counts of collections or localities, considerations of fossil
quality, and Lagerstätten. In all these cases,
however, the risk of circularity (two-way causation), in other words the partial to complete redundancy of empirical and sampling signals, as noted
above for formation counts and palaeontological
interest units (Raup 1977; Smith 2007a), must be
considered. It is not wise to term any of these
sampling proxies simply ‘sampling’, as if the
complex interdependence of data and sampling
signal does not exist.
As argued below, the use of more subtle
sampling measures, such as the number of localities
or fossil collections, used as a basis for sampling
standardization by several authors (e.g. Alroy
et al. 2001, 2008; Crampton et al. 2003; Benton
et al. 2004; Alroy 2010; Butler et al. 2011), may
offer a better approach. Other sampling measures
might include number of specimens (whether raw
numbers or relative numbers), dispersion of
sampling sites (Barnosky et al. 2005), and quality
of specimens (completeness of preservation), but
all of these are unlikely to be practical for

80

M. J. BENTON ET AL.

global-scale studies incorporating diverse taxa.
They are perhaps best employed at regional or
clade scale, where rarefaction and other sample
standardization methods may be used (e.g. Raup
1975; Benton et al. 2004; Barnosky et al. 2005).
It should be noted that rarefaction, although
commonly used to standardize sample sizes,
makes the assumption that ‘even sampling is fair
sampling’, which requires that organismal abundance is constant through time, which is unlikely.
In addition, there may also be a problem with community composition – if a diverse community is
dominated by one or more particularly abundant
taxa, it will be undersampled in terms of diversity.
Overall, subsampling global data by rarefaction
risks seriously ‘dampening’ the results, reducing
peaks in palaeodiversity to a flat line (Bush et al.
2004; Marshall 2010). Alroy’s (2010) shareholder
quorum sampling method seeks to reduce this
problem, ensuring that uncommon taxa are more
fairly represented, but the method can only retrieve
‘most of the common taxa and a stochastic assortment of the rare ones’, and so some of the global
signal-damping effects of rarefaction are retained.
Finally, it may be that rarefaction, and equivalent
techniques, really lead to a ‘relative’ diversity estimate, rather than an absolute one, being equivalent
to, for example, ‘diversity per X samples’. It is not
clear how this relates to actual palaeodiversity.
This then casts doubt on the usefulness of global
palaeodiversity curves ‘corrected’ by the use of
sampling standardization (e.g. Alroy et al. 2001,
2008; Alroy 2010). The correction techniques themselves have been questioned (Bush et al. 2004), and
these approaches correct only the collections
included in the study, and do not consider missing
collections (Smith 2007a). Further, the empirical
curves, and the ‘corrected’ versions have evolved
substantially over the ten-year span of these
studies, as more data have been added to the
PaleoDB. The ‘corrected’ curves differ from the
empirical curve (Sepkoski 1993; Benton 1995) not
only in suggesting that diversity in the sea reached
modern levels in the Palaeozoic, but also in highlighting elevated diversity spikes in the Devonian,
Permian, Late Cretaceous, and Palaeogene. These
could be novel discoveries that require explanation,
or they could reflect uneven data entry into the
PaleoDB, or they may have been generated in part
from the data manipulations.

Some 19 000 such units spanning the Phanerozoic,
and encompassing all recorded surface and subsurface rock sections from the United States and
Canada, are compiled in their macrostratigraphic
database ‘Macrostrat’ (http://macrostrat.geology.
wisc.edu). These sediment packages are not subject
to human whim or dependent on habitat or fossil heterogeneity, as are geological formations. In their
analysis of these data, Peters & Heim (2010) identify a long-term increase in rock record completeness
through the Phanerozoic, with many rises and falls,
an especially high peak in the latest Cretaceous, and
a dip to early Mesozoic completeness levels in the
Neogene. The Cretaceous peak and Neogene dip
correspond to a similar phenomenon reported by
Wills (2007) in assessing congruence indices
through geological time, perhaps indicating a real
pattern of rock record completeness.
These stratigraphic data allow detailed estimates
of rock volume through time, as well as estimates of
completeness of representation of fossiliferous units
taken from the PaleoDB. The Mesozoic and Cenozoic
are better sampled than the Palaeozoic; on average,
Cenozoic time intervals have a geological completeness that is approximately 40% greater than mean
Palaeozoic completeness (Peters & Heim 2010).
This approach to assessing geological completeness, limited to North America at present, has the
benefit of representing sedimentary rock volume in
a more comprehensive and accurate manner than
counts of geological formations or map areas. The
implications for assessing fossil record bias
through time may also be important. For example,
sampling standardization of PaleoDB data using rarefaction and equivalent techniques, omission of taxa
with extant members, and other data processing
approaches (Alroy et al. 2001, 2008; Alroy 2010)
produce corrected curves for marine diversification
through time that confirm Raup’s (1972) bias simulation model, namely that most of the apparently
low diversity levels in the Palaeozoic and Mesozoic
represent sampling failure, and that the rise in diversity over the past 100 Ma is not real. The Macrostrat
data, on the other hand, seem to imply that sampling
cannot be solely or even largely responsible for the
observed increase in marine generic diversity in the
past 100 Ma (Sepkoski 1997), especially in view of
the steep dip in sampling proportions in the Neogene
according to the three criteria assessed by Peters &
Heim (2010).

Testing and correcting for bias

Regional and local exploration of sampling completeness. Areas of outcropping sedimentary rock may
not yield any fossils at all, and large expanses of
homogeneous outcrop might very well yield the
same fossil assemblage throughout, or might show
increasing diversity with area. It may, therefore,
be preferable to use a measure of sampling directly

Regional exploration of geological completeness.
Peters and colleagues (Peters 2005, 2008; Peters &
Heim 2010) have pioneered a new approach to
investigating the completeness of the rock record
by focusing on gap-bound sediment packages.

ASSESSING THE QUALITY OF THE FOSSIL RECORD

related to the diversity data under scrutiny. Direct
measures of sampling might be the volume of
material collected (e.g. number of specimens), the
number of individual find spots within a location,
or an assessment of the effort involved. Although
relatively straightforward to apply to small-scale
field studies, it is difficult to apply such direct measures to large-scale palaeodiversity studies, and at
best it may be possible to compare global or continental datasets to the number (Fara 2002; Lloyd
et al. 2008) or area (Barnosky et al. 2005) of
recorded fossil-bearing localities.
Direct sampling measures are most applicable
to small-scale studies, where palaeontologists
might sample a fixed volume (Mander et al. 2008)
or area (Barras & Twitchett 2007) of sediment at
defined sampling horizons (Little 1996), or spend
a fixed amount of time sampling at each locality to
ensure parity between samples. Mander et al.
(2008) provide an example of controlling for
sampling bias in their palaeoecological study of
the Late Triassic mass extinction event in the SW
UK, where fixed samples of 1.6 kg of sediment
were collected for diversity and abundance analysis
at intervals of 1 m. However, it has been noted that
bulk-sampling methods are not always effective at
recording rare species, and it may be necessary to
integrate field samples with data from museum collections and the literature to gain a more reliable
picture of palaeodiversity (Harnik 2009).
It could be contended that poorly sampled time
intervals might sometimes correspond to times
when fossils are of poor quality. Especially among
complex organisms that are rarely preserved, such
as vertebrates, it could be worth assessing whether
some time bins have yielded more complete skeletons than others, and whether mean specimen completeness correlates with apparent diversity. If this
were the case, then specimen quality might provide
a guide to sampling.
Fossil quality has been considered in previous
studies of dinosaurs (e.g. Benton 2008a, b;
Mannion & Upchurch 2010) where the quality of
type specimens was found to have improved
through research time. In their detailed study of
sauropodomorph fossils, Mannion & Upchurch
(2010) found that mean skeletal completeness and
mean character completeness varied between time
bins, but roughly halved from the Triassic and
Early Jurassic to the Late Cretaceous. Mannion &
Upchurch (2010, p. 291) note that ‘The . . . results
suggest that sea-level has, in some fashion, controlled the quality of the sauropodomorph fossil
record, but only through part of the group’s evolutionary history, with high sea-level correlated
with low average completeness scores, and low sealevel with high completeness scores in the Jurassic –
Early Cretaceous.’ It is equally likely that the

81

apparent sporadic covariation of sauropodomorph
specimen quality with sea-level does not indicate a
causal link at all: note that many of the completeness
measures are based on relatively small sample sizes
(n ¼ 4– 24 taxa), so a single locality can dominate
the findings within a time bin. Perhaps such
studies of fossil specimen quality based on modest
numbers of specimens and localities cannot
address sampling at the global scale.
In a basinwide study of the Late Permian and
Early to Middle Triassic red beds of the South
Urals basins (Benton et al. 2004), some 289
localities, assigned to 13 stratigraphic divisions in
succession, have yielded 675 identified tetrapod
fossils. These were assigned to four ‘quality’ categories, namely (1) single isolated fragments, (2)
several individual elements of a taxon, (3) one or
more skulls, and (4) one or more skeletons. All the
noted materials, even the fragments, could be identified at least to family level, and so bone scrap is
excluded. Across the whole study, the numbers of
specimens in each category were 313, 288, 63, and
11 respectively. As reported before (Benton et al.
2004), the sampling measures of number of
localities and number of specimens per time bin
covary (Fig. 7a), but these do not covary with
either diversity of genera or families. The ‘quality’
measure (number of good specimens/total number
of specimens), where ‘good specimens’ are the
complete skulls or skeletons, shows a different
pattern (Fig. 7b) from either locality or specimen
numbers. Ignoring the first value, which is based
on a very low sample size, fossil quality in the
Permian is out of synchrony with generic and familial diversity (Fig. 7b), but seems to be in line with
generic diversity in particular in the Triassic.
However, the measure of fossil specimen quality
does not appear to covary with number of localities
or specimens (Fig. 7a, b). The change in behaviour
of the specimen quality measure across the PermoTriassic boundary is probably not a sample-size
artefact: Permian samples range from 11 –63 specimens per time bin, excluding the first time bin
(mean, 38.6) and Triassic sample sizes range from
17 –147 (mean, 68). Certainly, in the late Early and
Middle Triassic (time divisions 11 –13), numbers of
localities and specimens appear to peak in time bin
11 with number of families, but not number of
genera (Fig. 7a). Further, the specimen quality
index peaks in time bin 12 with number of genera
(Fig. 7b). None of the three sampling measures,
including specimen quality, could be said, however, to show a convincing covariation with apparent diversity, so suggesting that much of the
palaeodiversity signal is probably real.
In a similar study of echinoids, Smith (2007b)
showed that the Triassic fossil record was much
poorer than that of the Jurassic. He noted that 27%

82

M. J. BENTON ET AL.
160
Families

P Tr

Genera

20

140

Localities

120

Specimens

100

15

80
10

60
40

5

20

Numbers of localities/specimens

Numbers of families/genera

(a) 25

0

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13

Stratigraphic unit
Families

Numbers of families/genera

P Tr

Genera

20

Fossil quality

0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3

15

0.25
0.2

10

0.15
0.1

5

Mean fossil quality

(b) 25

0.05
0

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13

Stratigraphic unit

Fig. 7. Diversity and sampling through the
Permo-Triassic continental redbeds of the South Urals
basin, Russia. (a) Diversity of families and genera
covary, as do the sampling measures of numbers of
localities and specimens, but the diversity measures do
not covary with the sampling measures. (b) Mean fossil
quality (number of ‘good’ specimens: all specimens)
does not covary with diversity of genera or families in the
Permian, but appears to do so in the Triassic. Data from
Benton et al. (2004).

Triassic species were based on relatively complete
material (whole tests or whole tests plus spines),
compared to 69% from the Lower Jurassic.
Further, among Triassic species, 60% had been
established on isolated spines or dissociated interambulacral plates, whereas only 21% of Jurassic
species are named on such incomplete material.
The relatively poorer Triassic record was confirmed
also by slower accumulation of Triassic taxa in a
comparison of collector curves, longer implied
gaps from a study of molecular trees, and more
ghost lineages. Smith (2007b) explained these
differences by a combination of more limited
marine rocks in the Triassic when compared to the
Jurassic, as well as to evolutionary changes among
the echinoids, which acquired more robust tests in
the Jurassic. Such a clear demonstration of relative
differences in sampling quality of members of a
single clade between two time units then points to
the possibility of exact numerical correction when

comparing the palaeodiversity signals of Triassic
and Jurassic echinoids.
Phylogenetic and gap-counting methods. The
debate about whether number of formations is a
covariate or a determinant of palaeodiversity could
continue on its circular way unless additional data
can be introduced. A possible source of such information might be ghost ranges and Lazarus taxa. A
ghost range, or ghost lineage, is the minimum gap
implied by a cladogram where the oldest fossils of
two sister lineages differ in age (Norell 1992), and
a Lazarus taxon (Flessa & Jablonski 1983) is a
break in the record of a lineage that exists below
and above a particular sampling horizon. In both
cases, providing the cladogram is correct in the
first case, and providing the taxa below and above
the gap are the same in the second case, these can
both provide independent evidence for a failure
in sampling.
This has been noted before (Paul 1998). For
example, Smith (2001, p. 364) pointed out, ‘The
only realistic way to distinguish between sampling
and biologically driven patterns is to gather phylogenetic information. The key here is the recognition
of ghost lineages and the stratigraphical distribution
of pseudoextinctions.’ Pseudoextinctions are false
extinctions marking artificial truncations of
lineages, which, when corrected indicate Lazarus
gaps. The correct identification of such gaps can
change perceptions of evolutionary pattern: for
example, when Modesto et al. (2001) revised the
cladogram of procolophonids, a clade of small reptiles from the Permian and Triassic, they found that
several ghost lineages spanned the Permo-Triassic
boundary, so showing that the group was not so
severely affected by the Permo-Triassic mass
extinction as had been thought previously.
Here, we concentrate on ghost ranges. A number
of gap analyses have been carried out (e.g. Paul
1982, 1998; Flessa & Jablonski 1983; Benton
1987; Fara & Benton 2000; Smith 2001, 2007a, b;
Fara 2002), and we cannot add to what was said in
those papers, other than to urge caution. It has so
far been generally assumed that gaps in ranges
occur when fossils are not found as a result of
missing rocks and missing sampling. This is doubtless commonly the case, but there is a risk that
Lazarus gap analysis might still involve a measure
of circularity in that the method cannot distinguish
poor sampling from low abundance and diversity.
A lineage that showed genuine rises and falls in
abundance or breadth of geographical distribution
might show Lazarus gaps even if sampling is constant throughout, but this would be an evolutionary,
not a sampling, signal. This was the contention by
Wignall & Benton (1999) for times of low diversity
and high gap counts following mass extinctions.

ASSESSING THE QUALITY OF THE FOSSIL RECORD

A further weakness of gap analysis is that the detection of Lazarus taxa becomes harder as the gap duration increases (Benton 1987), and of course the
method cannot detect gaps before and after the currently known stratigraphic range. These criticisms
are true also of ghost ranges, and one might very
well expect that many ghost ranges do indeed
arise from low diversity and abundance of lineages
and clades soon after they became established and
before they had diversified fully.
Nevertheless, it is worth perhaps exploring ghost
range distribution in time as an independent guide
to sampling (Paul 1998). The assumptions would
be (1) that ghost ranges might be distributed in
time in negative proportion to putative sampling
proxies such as comprehensive counts of formations
or localities, and (2) that raw counts of taxa should
correlate better with those putative sampling
proxies than phylogenetially corrected counts of
taxa. The rationale of this last suggestion emerges
from a comparison of three counts of palaeodiversity, the taxon diversity estimate (TDE), a raw
count of numbers of taxa reported per time bin,
the ghost range diversity estimate (GDE), based
on a cladogram plotted against time, and the phylogenetic diversity estimate (PDE), the sum of TDE
and GDE (Barrett et al. 2009; Mannion & Upchurch
2010; Mannion et al. 2011).
We present four examples, the first two based on
relatively small sample sizes, the second two on
large examples, and these show broadly that phylogenetic gaps can indicate sampling failure.
Triassic archosaurian diversity. A recent comprehensive cladistic analysis of the relationships
of Triassic archosaurs (Brusatte et al. 2010, fig. 8)
offers a summary phylogeny plotted against time,
and highlighting ghost ranges. Lazarus taxa are not
shown. From this (Fig. 8; Table 4), ghost ranges
were summed for substages, and compared with
numbers of archosaur-bearing and tetrapod-bearing
formations for those same substages (data from
Benton et al. 2004; Sahney & Benton 2008; and
unpublished). Note that formations were assigned
to substages based on independent stratigraphic
evidence in each case, and with no interpolation.
Two counts of archosaur-bearing formations were
considered, first the ‘strict’ count, taken only from
the taxa included in the Brusatte et al. (2010) cladogram, and then the ‘all archosaur’ count, based on all
archosaurs known from the Triassic. The sums of
these three counts vary substantially: 37 actual archosaur (strict) FFC, 94 all-archosaur (wider) FFC,
and 292 all-tetrapod (comprehensive) FFC.
To compare gaps in the stratigraphic record with
ghost ranges, a measure of the ‘absence of formations’ is required. As a visual approximation
(Fig. 8), the inverse of the number of formations

83

per time bin was taken, by subtracting the actual
number from the maximum possible number of formations (maximum number of formations per time
bin were: actual archosaur-bearing formations, 7
in the upper Carnian and in the lower Norian; all
archosaur-bearing formations, 14 in the middle
Norian; all tetrapod-bearing formations, 26 in the
upper Olenekian). There is no obvious visual matching (Fig. 8) of times of significant ghost range, such
as the Anisian to Carnian interval, with times of
lower sampling (the Ladinian and lower Carnian
coincide, but the later Triassic epochs do not.
In comparisons of GDE (Table 5), the strict and
comprehensive FFC gave non-significant negative
associations between ghost ranges and formation
counts, whereas the wider FFC correlated negatively highly significantly with ghost ranges. However, this strong correlation disappears when first
differences are considered (Table 5), so the strong
correlation might be an artefact of parallel trends
of increasing numbers through the Triassic combined with small data sets. Comparison of TDE
and PDE (Table 5) shows that TDE correlates with
the strict FFC, but only at P , 0.1 with the wider
FFC, and not at all with the comprehensive FFC.
These relationships disappear with the PDE, which
shows both negative and positive non-significant
correlations with the sampling counts.
These results are equivocal, confirming the proposition that PDE correlates much less well with formation counts than TDE, but highlighting the odd
result that ghost range counts (GDE) also correlate
strongly with the wider FFC. The Triassic archosaur
fossil record is not simply dependent on rock
volume (no correlation with the comprehensive
FFC), and it is unresolved how well ghost ranges
predict sampling.
Mesozoic bird diversity. When the simple cladogram of Mesozoic birds from Chiappe & Witmer
(2002) is compared with minimum and maximum
estimates of bird-bearing formations, there is no correlation with ghost ranges, whether using the raw
data or detrended data (Table 6). The minimum estimate of locality numbers (¼ strict FFC) consists
of just the localities that yielded the bird taxa
included in Chiappe & Witmer’s (2002) cladogram,
whereas the comprehensive FFC comes from all
records of Mesozoic birds, as documented by Fountaine et al. (2005). The fossil record of Mesozoic
birds certainly includes very many ghost ranges
(55 stage-level ghost ranges and only 29 stage-level
records), and formation numbers, whether as a strict
or wider FFC, might be thought to have been a suitable predictor of ghost ranges, but this is not the case
whether for total or detrended data (Table 6).
When the raw palaeodiversity (TDE) is compared, however, it shows a remarkably strong

84

M. J. BENTON ET AL.

(a) 251

237

245

Ole

Anisian

228

216.5

Carnian

Ladinian

203.6

199.6

Rht

Norian

Revueltosaurus

Early Jurassic
PHYTOSAURIA
ORNITHOSUCHIDAE

Yarasuchus
Qianosuchus
Arizonasaurus
Bromsgroveia

Lotosaurus
Sillosuchus
Poposaurus
Effigia
Shuvosaurus
Arganasuchus
Fasolasuchus

Stagonosuchus
Ticinosuchus
Tikisuchus
Rauisuchus
Teratosaurus
Postosuchus
Batrachotomus
Prestosuchus
Saurosuchus
AETOSAURIA
Gracilisuchus
Erpetosuchus
CROCODYLOMORPHA
Lagerpeton
Dromomeron

Marasuchus
Pseudolagosuchus
Lewisuchus
Sacisaurus

Eucoelophysis

Silesaurus

Scleromochlus

SAURISCHIA

ORNITHISCHIA

PTEROSAURIA

(b) 60
50
40

Ghost range
Strat. gaps

30
20
10
0
u
u
u
u
u
u
-I
-I
-I m
-I
-I
-I
D
IN OLE LE- NS NS- LAD AD- RN RN- OR R- OR- RHT HTA A
C C
O
N NO N
L
R

Fig. 8.

ASSESSING THE QUALITY OF THE FOSSIL RECORD

85

Table 4. Comparison of phylogenetically implied gaps and formation numbers for Triassic archosaurs
Substage

Duration
(My)

Ghost
range

Archosaur
formations

Stratigraphic
gaps

All-tetrapod
formations

Stratigraphic
gaps

Ind
Ole(l)
Ole(u)
Ans(l)
Ans(u)
Lad(l)
Lad(u)
Crn(l)
Crn(u)
Nor(l)
Nor(m)
Nor(u)
Rht(l)
Rht(u)

1.5
1.5
1.5
3.5
3.5
1.5
1.5
3.35
3.5
6.5
6.5
6.5
3
3

0
0
5
8
10
12
16
10
7
1
1
1
0
0

5
3
7
6
6
3
2
1
13
10
14
13
8
3

9
11
7
8
8
11
12
13
1
4
0
1
6
11

32
17
36
23
30
10
16
15
34
16
20
18
16
9

4
19
0
13
6
26
20
21
2
20
16
18
20
27

Totals

46.85

71

94

102

292

212

Data are tabulated from a recent cladistic analysis in Brusatte et al. (2010, fig. 8), from which phylogenetically implied gaps (‘Ghost
range’) are drawn, and then compared with the inverse of the number of formations, as a measure of absence of information (‘Stratigraphic
gaps’ ¼ maximum number of formations in a time bin [14] minus actual number). Comparisons are made with the strict FFC (‘Archosaur
formations’) and the comprehensive FFC (‘All-tetrapod formations’).
Abbreviations of stratigraphic stage names as in Table 1, plus Rht, Rhaetian.

Table 5. Correlations of archosaurian ghost ranges (GDE, Ghost range
diversity estimate) with counts of restricted and all archosaur-bearing and
all tetrapod-bearing formations (strict, wider, and comprehensive FFCs) for
the Brusatte et al. (2010) study of Triassic archosaur phylogeny, showing
rank-order correlations for the raw data and for first differences (FD).
Taxon diversity estimates (TDE) and phylogenetic diversity estimates
(PDE ¼ TDE þ GDE) are also compared with the three formation counts

GDE v. Strict FFC
GDE v. Wider FFC
GDE v. Comprehensive FFC
GDE v. FD strict FFC
GDE v. FD wider FFC
GDE v. FD comprehensive FFC
TDE v. Strict FFC
TDE v. Wider FFC
TDE v. Comprehensive FFC
PDE v. Strict FFC
PDE v. Wider FFC
PDE v. Comprehensive FFC

Spearman’s r

P

20.41
20.86
20.34
0.20
0.15
0.27
0.79
0.57
20.02
0.40
20.27
20.24

0.237
0.001**
0.337
0.577
0.681
0.451
0.006
0.088
0.947
0.249
0.443
0.498

Fig. 8. Phylogeny of basal archosaurs (a), showing dates of the major lineages and ghost ranges. (b) Histograms
across the bottom show number of ghost ranges and a measure of the ‘absence of formations’ (¼ maximum number
minus actual number; Strat. gaps, stratigraphic gaps) for each time bin. Abbreviations: ANS, Anisian; CRN, Carnian;
IND, Induan; l, lower; LAD, Ladinian; NOR, Norian; OLE, Olenekian; RHT, Rhaetian; u, upper. A, based on data in
Brusatte et al. (2011).

86

M. J. BENTON ET AL.

Table 6. Correlations of Cretaceous bird ghost
ranges (GDE) with bird-bearing FFCs, read as a
strict FFC, representing only those formations with
the named bird taxa (from Chiappe & Witmer 2002)
and wider FFC figures (from Fountaine et al. 2005),
showing rank-order correlations for the raw data and
for first differences (FD). Correlations between these
measures and TDE and PDE are also given. Data are
calculated from Berriasian to Campanian only, to
avoid the edge effects of wide variation in number of
ghost ranges in the first time bin (Tithonian), and
necessary absence of ghost ranges in the last
(Maastrichtian)

GDE v. Strict FFC
GDE v. Wider FFC
GDE v. FD strict FFC
GDE v. FD wider FFC
TDE v. Strict FFC
TDE v. Comprehensive FFC
PDE v. Strict FFC
PDE v. Comprehensive FFC

Spearman’s r

P

20.44
20.22
20.43
20.17
0.90
0.65
0.38
0.47

0.180
0.518
0.191
0.619
0.000**
0.032*
0.248
0.147

correlation with a strict count of formations with
fossil birds and a weaker correlation with the
wider formation count (Table 6), but these two
signals are doubtless essentially redundant with
each other, as in the pterosaur case above. These
correlations disappear for the phylogenetically
corrected diversity estimate (PDE; Table 6).
In this rather extreme case, with high proportions of ghost ranges (relative completeness
index ¼ 20.527), these minimum estimates of
phylogenetically determined gap may provide a
guide to sampling that is not achievable through
the various strict and wider FFCs.
Dinosaurs. In an attempt to go beyond such
small-scale studies, an analysis of the dinosaurian
fossil record was conducted. This consists of the
420 species included in the formal dinosaur supertree of Lloyd et al. (2008), plotted against time,
using stratigraphic data to establish stage-level
divisions of the Mesozoic. Dinosaurian distribution
data comes from the Paleobiology database (http://
paleodb.org/; download of all non-avian body fossil
data on 29th June, 2010). We compared the
GDE:PDE ratio, diversity (GDE) and phylogenetically corrected diversity (PDE ¼ TDE þ GDE) to
three sampling proxies: (1) number of dinosaurbearing formations (DBFs), (2) number of dinosaurbearing localities (DBLs), and (3) the palaeoarea of
a spherical polygon described by drawing a convex
hull around the DBLs (Fig. 9).
As with previous dinosaur studies (e.g. Lloyd
et al. 2008; Barrett et al. 2009; Butler et al. 2011)

we find strong correlation between all of our sampling proxies and species diversity (Fig. 9). However,
we note a consistent weakening of this relationship when PDE is used instead of TDE (Table 7),
despite a strong correlation between GDE and sampling. The sampling proxies, dinosaur-bearing formations and dinosaur-bearing localities, doubtless
mix some redundancy (many formations/localities
yield a single species) with genuine sampling signal,
as discussed above, and so the strong correlation
between sampling proxy and palaeodiversity could
reflect a mix of true sampling signal and redundancy. A better sampling proxy in these cases might
be the total number of formations that have yielded
any kind of vertebrate fossil, or that are of the
correct facies to do so: this would allow inclusion
of localities and formations that have been searched,
but failed to produce dinosaur specimens.
In seeking to understand whether the relative
proportion of ghost ranges might provide a more
reliable guide to sampling than the traditional geological measures, the weak negative relationship
between the GDE:PDE ratio and the formation/
locality counts (only barely significant at P , 0.05
in the DBF case) is suggestive and indeed is
strengthened when generalized differencing is
used (McKinney 1990), where all three proxies
show a strong negative correlation (Table 7). Consequently, despite being only a minimal correction it
does appear that for dinosaurs at least the proportion
of phylogenetically-inferred to sampled lineages is
a good predictor of sampling.
Data and R code for all analyses are available
from GTL.
Baleen whales. In a further large-scale study,
taxonomic and phylogenetic diversity estimates of
mysticete whales were considered. The phylogeny
is based on Marx (2010, fig. 2), with Cetotherium
megalophysum excluded owing to a lack of precise
stratigraphic information. The formations that produced the taxa included in the tree of Marx (2010)
(strict FFC), as well as the total number of cetaceanbearing formations (wider FFC), and all marine fossiliferous formations (comprehensive FFC) assignable to stage level, which were downloaded from
the PaleoDB on 1st June, 2010, were all compared
to the two diversity estimates using Spearman rank
correlation (Table 7). While both the strict and
wider raw FFCs showed a significant positive correlation with the raw taxonomic diversity estimate,
this correlation disappeared when phylogenetic
diversity was considered instead. Furthermore, the
comprehensive FFC did not correlate with either
taxonomic or phylogenetically adjusted diversity.
When generalized differences were used instead of
the raw data, the correlation of the taxonomic diversity estimate with all three formation counts was

87

1.5
1.0
0.0

0.5

Log10 value

2.0

2.5

ASSESSING THE QUALITY OF THE FOSSIL RECORD

UT

LJ

MJ

200

UJ
150

LK

UK
100

Time (Ma)
Fig. 9. Dinosaur diversity and sampling. Taxonomic Diversity Estimate (TDE; black), Phylogenetic Diversity Estimate
(PDE; grey, based on Lloyd et al. 2008), Dinosaur-bearing Formations (DBFs; red), Dinosaur-bearing Localities
(DBLs; blue) and palaeoarea of a spherical polygon encompassing the DBLs (purple). Values are logged to allow
plotting on same scale. NB: Palaeoarea measure is further modified to allow plotting on same scale as values are orders
of magnitude larger than for other variables. Vertical lines indicate 95% confidence interval reflecting 1000
randomizations of dating uncertainty. Stratigraphic divisions: UT, Upper Triassic; LJ, Lower Jurassic; MJ, Middle
Jurassic; UJ, Upper Jurassic; LK, Lower Cretaceous; UK, Upper Cretaceous.

weakened, and indeed obliterated in the case of the
strict FFC. By contrast, the correlation of the phylogenetic diversity estimate with the rock record was
strengthened, but also turned negative in all cases.
However, none of the correlations were statistically
significant following differencing.
Perspective. In light of the need to distinguish
between the bias and common cause models (e.g.
Peters 2005, 2008; Smith & McGowan 2007), the
observation that phylogenetic diversity estimates
seem to decrease or remove existing correlations

between taxonomic estimates and a range of different measures of sampling gives rise to two possible
interpretations. First, if it were assumed that the
phylogenetic trees used are a reasonable representation of biological reality, the weakening of the
diversity-sampling correlation might indicate that
observed taxonomic diversity is largely driven by
bias, with the phylogenetically adjusted estimate
offering an improved and, presumably, truer
picture of biological reality. However, if the cladograms we used to perform this correction were in
some way flawed, ‘correcting’ diversity based on

88

M. J. BENTON ET AL.

Table 7. Correlations of dinosaur and mysticete taxonomic and phylogenetic
diversities with different measures of sampling
Taxon
Dinosauria

Mysticeti

Correlation

Spearman’s r

P

GDE:PDE v. DBF
GDE:PDE v. DBL
GDE:PDE v. Palaeoarea
TDE v. DBF
TDE v. DBL
TDE v. Palaeoarea
PDE v. DBF
PDE v. DBL
PDE v. Palaeoarea
GDE v. DBF
GDE v. DBL
GDE v. Palaeoarea
GD GDE:PDE v. DBF
GD GDE:PDE v. DBL
GD GDE:PDE v. Palaeoarea
GD TDE v. DBF
GD TDE v. DBL
GD TDE v. Palaeoarea
GD PDE v. DBF
GD PDE v. DBL
GD PDE v. Palaeoarea
GD GDE v. DBF
GD GDE v. DBL
GD GDE v. Palaeoarea
TDE v. strict FFC
PDE v. strict FFC
TDE v. wider FFC
PDE v. wider FFC
TDE v. comprehensive FFC
PDE v. comprehensive FFC
GD TDE v. strict FFC
GD PDE v. strict FFC
GD TDE v. wider FFC
GD PDE v. wider FFC
GD TDE v. comprehensive FFC
GD PDE v. comprehensive FFC

20.39
20.37
20.30
0.91
0.88
0.73
0.80
0.76
0.70
0.71
0.66
0.66
20.64
20.65
20.51
0.80
0.82
0.73
0.67
0.78
0.63
0.55
0.64
0.48
0.64
0.30
0.71
0.17
0.40
20.23
20.01
20.60
0.50
20.53
0.39
20.33

0.047*
0.060
0.138
0.000**
0.000**
0.000**
0.000**
0.000**
0.000**
0.000**
0.000**
0.000**
0.000**
0.000**
0.010*
0.000**
0.000**
0.000**
0.000**
0.000**
0.001**
0.006*
0.000**
0.016*
0.035*
0.366
0.015*
0.610
0.227
0.503
0.973
0.067
0.144
0.105
0.248
0.330

Abbreviations: DBF, dinosaur-bearing formations; DBL, dinosaur-bearing localities; FFC, fossiliferous formation count; GD, generalized differences (McKinney 1990); PDE, phylogenetic diversity estimate; TDE, taxonomic diversity estimate; strict FFC, number of formations from which the taxa in the
tree were recovered; wider FFC, total number of cetacean-bearing formations, as downloaded from the
PaleoDB; comprehensive FFC, total number of marine fossiliferous formations as downloaded from
the PaleoDB.
Probabilities (P) for each correlation measure are given, and these are marked as significant
(P , 0.05*) and highly significant (P , 0.005**).

their topology might result in the addition of more
noise than signal. In this case, the observed correlation between the sampling proxies and diversity
might either be the result of an actual bias, or of a
common cause – in either case, the addition of a
large number of spurious ghost ranges could obliterate any statistically significant relationship. In
addition, it is also worth noting that any phylogenetic correction fundamentally relies on the assumption that cladograms ignoring the potential presence
of ancestral taxa in the fossil record are an adequate

model of evolution. However, treating genuine
ancestor-descendant pairs as sister taxa may lead
to the inference of ghost lineages where none
exists, and hence the over-inflation of taxon estimates per time bin, which could bias phylogenetic
diversity corrections even if the topology of the cladogram itself were accurate.
Finally, cladograms may also suffer from other
problems, including the one-sidedness of the correction they provide (for obvious reasons, no ranges
leading upwards in time can be inferred from

ASSESSING THE QUALITY OF THE FOSSIL RECORD

them), and non-random taxon sampling, particularly
when the cladogram was constructed to analyse
the relationships of a particular subgroup of the
taxon in question (Lane et al. 2005). These factors
certainly have the potential to bias diversity estimates, and, if the taxa included in the tree present
a non-random or very small sample of the taxon of
interest, could even lead to completely spurious
diversity patterns.

of interest, leaving little more than a flat line or
random noise to be interpreted by the researcher.
One way to address this issue may be to consider
both potential sampling proxies and evolutionarily
meaningful variables at the same time, giving
them an equal chance to explain the data of interest
(e.g. Mayhew et al. 2007; Marx & Uhen 2010). If in
such an analysis the explanatory power of sampling
proxies outperforms that of the proposed biological
model, the case for a large-scale bias in the data is
corroborated. If, on the other hand, the biological
model outperforms the bias hypothesis, a common
cause or sampling proxy/diversity data redundancy
explanation may be considered. Finally, the best
model might also include aspects of both sampling
bias and a biological signal. One example of this
approach was recently implemented by Mayhew
et al. (2007), who tested for, and found, a significant
association of Phanerozoic diversity with temperature, while simultaneously assessing the effect of
sampling probability on their results. Similarly,
Marx & Uhen (2010) applied a series of models
including food abundance, climate change, and a
sampling proxy (number of fossiliferous marine formations) to late Oligocene to Pleistocene neocete
whale diversity (Fig. 10; Table 8), and assessed
their respective goodness-of-fit using the secondorder Akaike’s Information Criterion (AICc) and
Akaike weights (Sugiura 1978; Burnham &
Anderson 2002).
It is clear that in both cases the models chosen
were far from exhaustive in their exploration of

Model-based comparison of bias and other explanatory variables. While a large number of studies have
investigated the impact of geological or human bias
on measures of palaeodiversity, relatively few have
tried to contrast the latter with the explanatory
power of potentially biologically relevant variables
that might account for some, or most of the observed
diversity signal (e.g. Smith & McGowan 2007;
Barrett et al. 2009; Benson et al. 2010). While it
may well be possible that genuine biological
signals in the fossil record are overwhelmed by geological biases, this assumption needs to be tested
explicitly. Correcting palaeodiversity data using
some form of sampling proxy (e.g. Smith &
McGowan 2007; Barrett et al. 2009) and then
attempting to interpret the residuals in a biologically
meaningful way may be counterproductive in this
sense, as it runs the risk of throwing the baby out
with the bathwater: if the presumed sampling
proxy is either redundant with diversity or the
result of a common cause, removing it from the
data may obliterate the actual (biological) signal
neocete
diversity
20

5

Pliocene Pl.

0

40

60

mysticete
diversity
80

5

10

15

20

89

odontocete
diversity
10

20

30

40

50

diatom
diversity

δ18O(‰)

150 200 250 300 350 2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

Pleistocene
Gelasian
Piacenzian
Zanclean

Late

Messinian

Middle

15

Miocene

10

Tortonian

Serravallian
Langhian

20

Early

ºC

Burdigalian

+

25

Oligocene

Aquitanian

Chattian

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

SE x 100

Fig. 10. Comparison of (a) neocete; (b) mysticete; (c) odontocete palaeodiversity with (d) diatom paleodiversity
and (e) global d18O values (E), from Marx & Uhen (2010). Cetacean diversity is shown as sampled in bin data as
downloaded from the Paleobiology Database (grey) and as a ranged through estimate (black). Based on data in
Marx & Uhen (2010).

90

M. J. BENTON ET AL.

Table 8. Estimated best-fit model parameters for the neocete, mysticete and odontocete datasets, as reported
by Marx & Uhen (2010)
Neoceti sampled
in bin

Intercept
st. dur.
Diatom
d18O
Rock

Neoceti ranged
through

Mysticeti sampled
in bin

Odontoceti
sampled in bin

Estimate

S.E.

Estimate

S.E.

Estimate

S.E.

Estimate

S.E.

6.694
20.047
0.029
22.881
–

1.465
0.189
0.005
0.577
–

6.649
20.068
0.028
22.253
20.013

1.111
0.167
0.003
0.422
0.006

2.214
0.096
0.015
21.077
–

0.179
0.023
,0.001
0.081
–

5.566
0.049
0.020
22.147
–

1.179
0.166
0.003
0.351
–

Explanation of terms: d18O, oxygen isotope records used as proxy for climate change; diatom, diatom species diversity (Neptune database);
rock, total number of fossiliferous marine formations as downloaded from the Paleobiology Database; st. dur., geological stage duration;
the latter was included as a non-optional predictor in all models on order to account for the potentially biasing effects of unequal Caenozoic
stage durations. Based on data from Marx & Uhen (2010).

potential predictors, and other methods of simultaneously assessing the relative impact of bias and
biology may be envisaged. Nevertheless, they make
the point that combining sampling proxies and
potential evolutionary drivers represents a more
inclusive and, most likely, fairer way of assessing
palaeodiversity than analysing either of these variables in isolation.

Conclusions
While it is evident that the fossil record is incomplete, some recent approaches to identifying bias,
or ‘megabias’, have been flawed. The sampling
proxies, such as number of formations containing
particular fossils, or map areas from particular
parts of the world, may not suffice as independent
evidence for sampling failure. The two signals,
rock volume and palaeodiversity, often covary
closely, but this need not indicate that the former
drives the latter. In fact, as already suggested
(Peters 2005), both may be driven by an external
‘common cause’ such as sea-level change or, in
the case of terrestrial organisms, by rates of uplift
and by the weather, and consequent variation in
volumes of sedimentary rock accumulation.
Further, as argued here, much of the covariance
of rock volume metrics and palaeodiversity is
likely a result of redundancy of the signals – the
number of formations containing dinosaurs is
tightly linked to the number of dinosaur species
because finds are sporadic and interdependent
(Benton 2008a). Removing the formation count
from the species count produces a flat line because
all signals, both geological and biological, have
been removed. This observation of redundancy is
a criticism of the assumption that measures of
rock volume are independent proxies for sampling,
and it says nothing about the quality of the fossil

record of dinosaurs (and other similar terrestrial
taxa), which is undoubtedly patchy and incomplete.
We suggest four reasonable approaches to exploring sampling of the fossil record that avoid the problems of recent global-scale numerical explorations
of covariance. First, regional-scale explorations of
sampling may work because sampling metrics can
be more detailed and can explore aspects of both
rock volume and human effort. Further, explorations
of rock volume that avoid the confusions of imprecise measurements of map areas that may not relate
to rock availability (Dunhill 2011, in press) and the
human quirks of geological formations (that scale
over at least eight orders of magnitude), may provide
independent estimators of sampling potential. A
third approach may be to explore gaps (Lazarus
gaps) and ghost ranges, which are both independently determined measures of known fossil
absences. Our initial studies here are only moderately
promising, however. A fourth approach, and perhaps
the best of all because it does not assume primacy of
either the fossil record or the sampling metrics, is to
compare multiple models with a palaeodiversity
curve, some models reflecting changes in the
environment and others reflecting sampling, and
yet others combining environmental change and
sampling. The benefit of this approach is that there
are no prior assumptions, and it assesses a variety
of models for goodness of fit; the weakness is that
the real drivers of palaeodiversity in any particular
case may elude measurement and so may be missed.
Our proposal is that palaeontologists should be
less obsessed about the poor quality of the fossil
record, and that global-scale, single-hit analyses
may never address the issue of whether the fossil
record is good or bad, whether it is driven primarily by macroevolution or megabiases. Each
time bin, each geographical region, and each clade
is sampled differently, and so a global answer can
probably never be found. Paul (1998) noted how

ASSESSING THE QUALITY OF THE FOSSIL RECORD

palaeontologists seem to over-react and make a
special issue out of fossil record incompleteness
when compared to other biologists and earth scientists, who are comfortable that their data are not
perfect, and who use standard methods to explore
quality and confidence issues appropriate to
each study.
We thank A. Smith and A. J. McGowan for organizing the
meeting, and for their invitation to participate. This work
was funded in part by NERC grant NE/C518973/1 to
MJB, NERC doctoral training grant NE/H525111/1 to
AMD, GTL was supported by NERC grant NE/
F016905/1 to A. Smith, J. Young and P. Pearson, and
FGM by a University of Otago Doctoral Scholarship. We
thank A. McGowan, A. Smith, M. Wills, and an anonymous reviewer for reading the manuscript at various
stages, and for helpful comments.

References
Adrain, J. M. & Westrop, S. R. 2000. An empirical assessment of taxic paleobiology. Science, 289, 110–112.
Alroy, J. 2002. How many named species are valid?
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
USA, 99, 3706–3711.
Alroy, J. 2010. The shifting balance of diversity among
major marine animal groups. Science, 329, 1191–1194.
Alroy, J., Marshall, C. R. et al. 2001. Effects of
sampling standardization on estimates of Phanerozoic
marine diversification. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA, 98, 6261– 6266.
Alroy, J., Aberhan, M. et al. 2008. Phanerozoic trends
in the global diversity of marine invertebrates. Science,
321, 97–100.
Angielczyk, K. D. 2002. A character-based method for
measuring the fit of a cladogram to the fossil record.
Systematic Biology, 51, 176– 191.
Barnosky, A. D., Carrasco, M. A. & Davis, E. B. 2005.
The impact of the species-area relationship on estimates of paleodiversity. PLoS Biology, 3, 1356–1361.
Barras, C. G. & Twitchett, R. J. 2007. Response of the
marine infauna to Triassic –Jurassic environmental
change: ichnological data from Southern England.
Palaeogeography, Palaeoecology, Palaeoclimatology,
244, 223– 241.
Barrett, P. M., Butler, R. J., Edwards, N. P. &
Milner, A. R. 2008. Pterosaur distribution in time
and space: an atlas. Zitteliana B, 26, 61– 107.
Barrett, P. M., McGowan, A. J. & Page, V. 2009. Dinosaur diversity and the rock record. Proceedings of the
Royal Society, B, 276, 2667– 2674.
Benson, R. J., Butler, R. J., Lindgren, J. & Smith, A. S.
2010. Palaeodiversity of Mesozoic marine reptiles:
mass extinctions and temporal heterogeneity in geologic megabiases affecting vertebrates. Proceedings of
the Royal Society, B, 277, 829 –834.
Benton, M. J. 1987. Mass extinctions among families
of non-marine tetrapods: the data. Mémoires de la
Société Géologique, France, 150, 21–32.
Benton, M. J. 1995. Diversification and extinction in the
history of life. Science, 268, 52– 58.

91

Benton, M. J. 1998. The quality of the fossil record of the
vertebrates. In: Donovan, S. K. & Paul, C. R. C. (eds)
The Adequacy of the Fossil Record. Wiley, New York,
269– 303.
Benton, M. J. 2001. Finding the tree of life: matching
phylogenetic trees to the fossil record through the
20th century. Proceedings of the Royal Society, B,
268, 2123– 2130.
Benton, M. J. 2008a. Fossil quality and naming dinosaurs. Biology Letters, 4, 729– 732.
Benton, M. J. 2008b. How to find a dinosaur, and the role
of synonymy in biodiversity studies. Paleobiology,
34, 516 –533.
Benton, M. J. 2009. The Red Queen and the Court Jester:
species diversity and the role of biotic and abiotic
factors through time. Science, 323, 728 –732.
Benton, M. J. & Hitchin, R. 1997. Congruence between
phylogenetic and stratigraphic data on the history
of life. Proceedings of the Royal Society, B, 264,
885– 890.
Benton, M. J. & Storrs, G. W. 1994. Testing the quality
of the fossil record: paleontological knowledge is
improving. Geology, 22, 111– 114.
Benton, M. J., Wills, M. & Hitchin, R. 2000. Quality of
the fossil record through time. Nature, 403, 534–537.
Benton, M. J., Tverdokhlebov, V. P. & Surkov, M. V.
2004. Ecosystem remodelling among vertebrates at
the Permian–Triassic boundary in Russia. Nature,
432, 97–100.
Benton, M. J., Zhou, Z., Orr, P., Zhang, F. & Kearns,
S. 2008. The remarkable fossils from the Early Cretaceous Jehol Biota of China and how they have changed
our knowledge of Mesozoic life. Proceedings of the
Geologists’ Association, 119, 209–228.
Bernard, E. L., Ruta, M., Tarver, J. E. & Benton, M. J.
2010. The fossil record of early tetrapods: worker
effort and the end-Permian mass extinction. Acta
Palaeontologica Polonica, 55, 213–228.
Brusatte, S. L., Benton, M. J., Desojo, J. B. & Langer,
M. C. 2010. The higher-level phylogeny of Archosauria (Tetrapoda: Diapsida). Journal of Systematic
Palaeontology, 8, 3 –47.
Brusatte, S. L., Benton, M. J., Lloyd, G. T., Ruta, M. &
Wang, S. C. 2011. Macroevolutionary patterns in the
evolutionary radiation of archosaurs (Tetrapoda: Diapsida). Earth and Environmental Science Transactions
of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, 101, 285–299.
Burnham, K. P. & Anderson, D. R. 2002. Model Selection
and Multimodel Inference: A Practical Informationtheoretic Approach. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Bush, A. M., Markey, M. J. & Marshall, C. R. 2004.
Removing bias from diversity curves: the effects
of spatially organized biodiversity on samplingstandardization. Paleobiology, 30, 666–686.
Butler, R. J., Barrett, P. M., Nowbath, S. &
Upchurch, P. 2009. Estimating the effects of the
rock record on pterosaur diversity patterns: implications for hypotheses of bird/pterosaur competitive
replacement. Paleobiology, 35, 432 –446.
Butler, R. J., Benson, R. J., Carrano, W. T., Mannion,
P. D. & Upchurch, P. 2011. Sea level, dinosaur diversity and sampling biases: investigating the ‘common
cause’ hypothesis in the terrestrial realm. Proceedings
of the Royal Society, B, 278, 1165–1170.

92

M. J. BENTON ET AL.

Carpenter, K. 1997. Morrison formation. In: Currie,
P. J. & Padian, K. (eds) Encyclopedia of Dinosaurs.
University of California Press, Berkeley, California, 5.
Chiappe, L. M. & Witmer, L. M. (eds) 2002. Mesozoic
Birds: Above the Heads of Dinosaurs. University of
California Press, Berkeley, California.
Cox, B. M., Sumbler, M. G. & Ivimey-Cook, H. C. 1999.
A formational framework for the Lower Jurassic of
England and Wales (onshore area). British Geological
Survey Research Report RR/99/01, 1 –28.
Crampton, J. S., Beu, A. G., Cooper, R. A., Jones, C. M.,
Marshall, B. & Maxwell, P. A. 2003. Estimating
the rock volume bias in palaeodiversity studies.
Science, 301, 358–360.
Darwin, C. 1859. On the Origin of Species by Means of
Natural Selection. John Murray, London.
Dodson, P. 1990. Counting dinosaurs, how many kinds
were there? Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, USA, 87, 7608–7612.
Donovan, S. & Paul, C. R. C. (eds) 1998. The Adequacy
of the Fossil Record. Wiley, New York.
Dunhill, A. M. 2011. Using remote sensing and a GIS
to quantify rock exposure in England and Wales:
implications for paleodiversity studies. Geology, 39,
111– 114.
Dunhill, A. M. in press. Problems with using rock outcrop area as a paleontological sampling proxy: comparing rock outcrop and exposure area in California,
New York State, Australia, and England and Wales.
Paleobiology, 38, in press.
Dyke, G. J., McGowan, A. J., Nudds, R. L. & Smith, D.
2009. The shape of pterosaur evolution: evidence from
the fossil record. Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 22,
890– 898.
Erwin, D. H. 2009. Climate as a driver of evolutionary
change. Current Biology, 19, R575– R583.
Fara, E. 2002. Sea-level variations and the quality of the
continental fossil record. Journal of the Geological
Society, London, 159, 489 –491.
Fara, E. & Benton, M. J. 2000. The fossil record of
Cretaceous tetrapods. Palaios, 15, 161–165.
Flessa, K. W. & Jablonski, D. 1983. Extinction is here to
stay. Paleobiology, 9, 315–321.
Foote, M. & Raup, D. M. 1996. Fossil preservation and
the stratigraphic ranges of taxa. Paleobiology, 22,
121–140.
Foote, M. & Sepkoski, J. J. 1999. Absolute measures of
the completeness of the fossil record. Nature, 398,
415– 417.
Forey, P., Fortey, R. A., Kenrick, P. & Smith, A. B.
2004. Taxonomy and fossils: a critical appraisal.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, B,
359, 639– 653.
Fountaine, T., Benton, M. J., Dyke, G. J. & Nudds,
R. L. 2005. The quality of the fossil record of Mesozoic
birds. Proceedings of the Royal Society, B, 272,
289– 294.
Fröbisch, J. 2008. Global taxonomic diversity of anomodonts (Tetrapoda, Therapsida) and the terrestrial rock
record across the Permo-Triassic boundary. PLoS One,
3, e3733.
Fröbisch, J. 2009. Composition and similarity of global
anomodont-bearing faunas. Earth-Science Reviews,
95, 119–157.

Guisan, A. & Thuiller, W. 2005. Predicting species distribution: offering more than simple habitat models.
Ecology Letters, 8, 993– 1009.
Guisan, A. & Zimmermann, N. E. 2000. Predictive
habitat distribution models in ecology. Ecological
Modelling, 135, 147– 186.
Harnik, P. G. 2009. Unveiling rare diversity by integrating museum, literature, and field data. Paleobiology,
35, 190– 208.
Haubold, H. 1990. Dinosaurs and fluctuating sea levels
during the Mesozoic. Historical Biology, 4, 75– 106.
Hendy, A. J. W. 2009. The influence of lithification on
Cenozoic marine biodiversity trends. Paleobiology,
35, 51–62.
Huelsenbeck, J. P. 1994. Comparing the stratigraphic
record to estimates of phylogeny. Paleobiology, 20,
470–483.
Kalmar, A. & Currie, D. J. 2010. The completeness of
the continental fossil record and its impact on patterns
of diversification. Paleobiology, 36, 51– 60.
Kiessling, W. 2005. Habitat effects and sampling bias on
Phanerozoic reef distribution. Facies, 51, 24–32.
Lane, A., Janis, C. M. & Sepkoski, J. J. Jr. 2005.
Estimating paleodiversities: a test of the taxic and
phylogenetic methods. Paleobiology, 31, 21– 34.
Little, C. T. S. 1996. The Pliensbachian–Toarcian
(Lower Jurassic) extinction event. Geological Society
of America, Special Paper, 307, 505–512.
Lloyd, G. T., Davis, K. E. et al. 2008. Dinosaurs and the
Cretaceous Terrestrial Revolution. Proceedings of the
Royal Society, B, 275, 2483–2490.
Lloyd, G. T., Smith, A. B. & Young, J. R. 2011. Quantifying the deep-sea rock and fossil record bias using
coccolithophores. In: McGowan, A. J. & Smith,
A. B. (eds) Comparing the Geological and Fossil
Records: Implications for Biodiversity Studies. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 358,
167–177.
Mander, L., Twitchett, R. J. & Benton, M. J. 2008.
Palaeoecology of the Late Triassic extinction event
in the SW UK. Journal of the Geological Society,
165, 319 –332.
Mannion, P. D. & Upchurch, P. 2010. Completeness
metrics and the quality of the sauropodomorph fossil
record through geological and historical time. Paleobiology, 36, 283– 302.
Mannion, P. D., Upchurch, P., Carrano, W. T. &
Barrett, P. M. 2011. Testing the effect of the rock
record on diversity: a multidisciplinary approach to
elucidating the generic richness of sauropodomorph
dinosaurs through time. Biological Reviews, 86,
157–181.
Markwick, P. J. 1998. Fossil crocodilians as indicators
of Late Cretaceous and Cenozoic climates: implications for using palaeontological data in reconstructing palaeoclimate. Palaeogeography, Palaeoecology,
Palaeoclimatology, 137, 205–271.
Marshall, C. R. 1990. Confidence intervals on stratigraphic ranges. Paleobiology, 16, 1 –10.
Marshall, C. R. 1997. Confidence intervals on stratigraphic ranges with non-random distributions of
fossil horizons. Paleobiology, 23, 165–173.
Marshall, C. R. 2010. Marine biodiversity dynamics
over deep time. Science, 329, 1156–1157.

ASSESSING THE QUALITY OF THE FOSSIL RECORD
Marx, F. G. 2009. Marine mammals through time: when
less is more in studying palaeodiversity. Proceedings
of the Royal Society, B, 276, 887–892.
Marx, F. G. 2010. The more the merrier? A large cladistic
analysis of mysticetes, and comments on the transition
from teeth to baleen. Journal of Mammalian Evolution,
28, 77–200.
Marx, F. G. & Uhen, M. D. 2010. Climate, critters, and
cetaceans: Cenozoic drivers of the evolution of
modern whales. Science, 327, 993– 996.
Maxwell, W. D. & Benton, M. J. 1990. Historical tests
of the absolute completeness of the fossil record of
tetrapods. Paleobiology, 16, 322–335.
May, R. M. 1990. How many species? Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series
B, 330, 293– 304.
Mayhew, P. J., Jenkins, G. B. & Benton, T. G. 2007. A
long-term association between global temperature
and biodiversity, origination and extinction in the
fossil record. Proceedings of the Royal Society B,
275, 47–53.
McGowan, A. & Smith, A. 2008. Are global Phanerozoic
diversity curves truly global? A study of the relationship between regional rock records and global Phanerozoic marine diversity. Paleobiology, 34, 80–103.
McKinney, M. L. 1990. Classifying and analysing evolutionary trends. In: McNamara, K. J. (ed.) Evolutionary Trends. Belhaven Press, London, 28– 58.
Modesto, S., Sues, H.-D. & Damiani, R. 2001. A new
Triassic procolophonoid reptile and its implications
for procolophonoid survivorship during the PermoTriassic extinction event. Proceedings of the Royal
Society, B, 268, 2047– 2052.
Nichol, D. 1977. The number of living animals likely to
be fossilized. Florida Scientist, 40, 135– 139.
Norell, M. 1992. Taxic origin and temporal diversity: the
effect of phylogeny. In: Novacek, M. & Wheeler, Q.
(eds) Extinction and Phylogeny. Columbia University
Press, New York, 89–118.
Norell, M. A. & Novacek, M. J. 1992. The fossil record
and evolution: comparing cladistic and paleontologic
evidence for vertebrate history. Science, 255,
1690–1693.
Paul, C. R. C. 1982. The adequacy of the fossil record. In:
Joysey, K. A. & Friday, A. E. (eds) Problems of Phylogenetic Reconstruction. Academic Press, London,
75– 117.
Paul, C. R. C. 1998. Adequacy, completeness and the
fossil record. In: Donovan, S. K. & Paul, C. R. C.
(eds) The Adequacy of the Fossil Record. Wiley,
New York, 1–22.
Peters, S. E. 2005. Geologic constraints on the macroevolutionary history of marine animals. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 102,
12 326 –12 331.
Peters, S. E. 2006. Macrostratigraphy of North America.
Journal of Geology, 114, 391–412.
Peters, S. E. 2008. Environmental determinants of extinction selectivity. Nature, 454, 626–629.
Peters, S. E. & Foote, M. 2001. Biodiversity in the
Phanerozoic: a reinterpretation. Paleobiology, 27,
583–601.
Peters, S. E. & Foote, M. 2002. Determinants of extinction in the fossil record. Nature, 416, 420–424.

93

Peters, S. E. & Heim, N. A. 2010. The geological completeness of paleontological sampling in North America.
Paleobiology, 36, 61–79.
Preston, F. W. 1948. The commonness, and rarity, of
species. Ecology, 29, 254– 283.
Purnell, M. A. & Donoghue, P. C. J. 2005. Between
death and data: biases in interpretation of the fossil
record of conodonts. Special Papers in Palaeontology,
73, 7 –25.
Raup, D. M. 1972. Taxonomic diversity during the Phanerozoic. Science, 177, 1065– 1071.
Raup, D. M. 1975. Taxonomic diversity estimates under
rarefaction. Paleobiology, 1, 333– 342.
Raup, D. M. 1976. Species diversity in the Phanerozoic: a
tabulation. Paleobiology, 2, 279– 288.
Raup, D. M. 1977. Systematists follow the fossils. Paleobiology, 3, 328– 329.
Ronov, A. B. 1978. The earth’s sedimentary shell. International Geology Review, 24, 1313– 1363.
Ronov, A. B. 1994. Phanerozoic transgressions and
regressions on the continents: a quantitative approach
based on areas flooded by the sea and areas of marine
and continental deposition. American Journal of
Science, 294, 777–801.
Russell, D. A. 1995. China and the lost worlds of the
dinosaurian era. Historical Biology, 10, 3–12.
Sahney, S. & Benton, M. J. 2008. Recovery from the
most profound mass extinction of all time. Proceedings
of the Royal Society, B, 275, 759– 765.
Sahney, S., Benton, M. J. & Ferry, P. A. 2010. Links
between global taxonomic diversity, ecological diversity, and the expansion of vertebrates on land.
Biology Letters, 6, 544– 547.
Sepkoski, J. J. Jr. 1993. Ten years in the library: how
changes in taxonomic data bases affect perception
of macroevolutionary pattern. Paleobiology, 19,
43–51.
Sepkoski, J. J. Jr. 1997. Biodiversity: past, present, and
future. Journal of Paleontology, 71, 533–539.
Sepkoski, J. J. Jr, Bambach, R. K., Raup, D. M. &
Valentine, J. W. 1981. Phanerozoic marine diversity
and the fossil record. Nature, 293, 435–437.
Sheehan, P. M. 1977. Species diversity in the Phanerozoic: a reflection of labor by systematists? Paleobiology, 3, 325 –328.
Simms, M. J., Chidlaw, N., Morton, N. & Page, K. N.
2004. British Lower Jurassic Stratigraphy. Geological
Conservation Review Series, 30. JNCC, London.
Smith, A. B. 2001. Large-scale heterogeneity of the fossil
record: implications for Phanerozoic diversity studies.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society,
Series B, 356, 351–367.
Smith, A. B. 2007a. Marine diversity through the Phanerozoic: problems and prospects. Journal of the Geological Society, London, 164, 731–745.
Smith, A. B. 2007b. Intrinsic versus extrinsic biases in the
fossil record: contrasting the fossil record of echinoids
in the Triassic and early Jurassic using sampling data,
phylogenetic analysis, and molecular clocks. Paleobiology, 33, 310–323.
Smith, A. B. & McGowan, A. J. 2007. The shape of the
Phanerozoic marine palaeodiversity curve: how much
can be predicted from the sedimentary rock record of
Western Europe? Palaeontology, 50, 1 –10.

94

M. J. BENTON ET AL.

Smith, A. B. & McGowan, A. J. 2008. Temporal patterns
of barren intervals in the Phanerozoic. Paleobiology,
34, 155–161.
Stanley, S. M. 2007. An analysis of the history of marine
animal diversity. Paleobiology, 33 (Suppl. 4), 1 –55.
Sugiura, N. 1978. Further analysis of the data by Akaike’s
information criterion and the finite corrections. Communications in Statistics, Series A, 7, 13– 26.
Tarver, J. E., Braddy, S. J. & Benton, M. J. 2007. The
effects of sampling bias on Palaeozoic faunas and
implications for macroevolutionary studies. Palaeontology, 50, 177 –184.
Tarver, J. E., Donoghue, P. C. J. & Benton, M. J. 2011.
Is evolutionary history repeatedly rewritten in light
of new fossil discoveries? Proceedings of the Royal
Society, B, 278, 599–604.
Upchurch, P. & Barrett, P. M. 2005. Phylogenetic
and taxic perspectives on sauropod diversity. In:
Curry-Rogers, K. A. & Wilson, J. A. (eds) The Sauropods: Evolution and Paleobiology. University of
California Press, Berkeley, California, 104–124.
Upchurch, P., Mannion, P. D., Benson, R. B. J.,
Butler, R. J. & Carrano, M. T. 2011. Geological
and anthropogenic controls on the sampling of the terrestrial fossil record: a case study from the Dinosauria.
In: Smith, A. B. & McGowan, A. J. (eds) Comparing
the Geological and Fossil Records: Implications for
Biodiversity Studies. Geological Society, London,
Special Publications, 358, 209–240.
Valentine, J. W. 1969. Patterns of taxonomic and ecological structure of the shelf benthos during Phanerozoic time. Palaeontology, 12, 684–709.

View publication stats

Vermeij, G. J. & Grosberg, R. K. 2010. The great divergence: when did diversity on land exceed that in the
sea? Integrative and Comparative Biology, 50,
675–682.
Wall, P., Ivany, L. & Wilkinson, B. 2009. Revisiting
Raup: exploring the influence of outcrop area on diversity in light of modern sample-standardization techniques. Paleobiology, 35, 146 –167.
Wang, S. C. & Dodson, P. 2006. Estimating the diversity
of dinosaurs. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, USA, 103, 13 601– 13 605.
Weishampel, D. B. 1996. Fossils, phylogeny, and discovery: a cladistic study of the history of tree topologies
and ghost lineage durations. Journal of Vertebrate
Paleontology, 16, 191– 197.
Wickström, L. M. & Donoghue, P. C. J. 2005. Cladograms, phylogenies and the veracity of the conodont
fossil record. Special Papers in Palaeontology, 73,
185–218.
Wignall, P. B. & Benton, M. J. 1999. Lazarus
taxa and fossil abundance at times of biotic crisis.
Journal of the Geological Society, London, 156,
453–456.
Williams, H. S. 1901. The discrimination of time-values
in geology. Journal of Geology, 9, 570 –585.
Wills, M. A. 1999. Congruence between phylogeny and
stratigraphy: randomization tests. Systematic Biology,
48, 559– 580.
Wills, M. A. 2007. Fossil ghost ranges are most common
in some of the oldest and some of the youngest
strata. Proceedings of the Royal Society, B, 274,
2421– 2427.

