Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ujvp20

A Redescription of Kunpania Scopulusa,
a Bidentalian Dicynodont (Therapsida,
Anomodontia) from the ?Guadalupian of
Northwestern China
Kenneth D. Angielczyk, Jun Liu & Wan Yang
To cite this article: Kenneth D. Angielczyk, Jun Liu & Wan Yang (2021): A Redescription of
Kunpania�Scopulusa, a Bidentalian Dicynodont (Therapsida, Anomodontia) from the ?Guadalupian
of Northwestern China, Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, DOI: 10.1080/02724634.2021.1922428
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/02724634.2021.1922428

View supplementary material

Published online: 28 May 2021.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 167

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ujvp20

Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology e1922428 (16 pages)
© by the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology
DOI: 10.1080/02724634.2021.1922428

ARTICLE

A REDESCRIPTION OF KUNPANIA SCOPULUSA, A BIDENTALIAN DICYNODONT
(THERAPSIDA, ANOMODONTIA) FROM THE ?GUADALUPIAN OF NORTHWESTERN CHINA
KENNETH D. ANGIELCZYK,*,1 JUN LIU, 2,3 and WAN YANG4
Negaunee Integrative Research Center, Field Museum of Natural History, 1400 South Lake Shore Drive, Chicago, Illinois 60605,
U.S.A., kangielczyk@ﬁeldmuseum.org;
2
Key Laboratory of Vertebrate Evolution and Human Origins of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology
and Paleoanthropology, CAS Center for Excellence in Life and Paleoenvironment, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100044,
China;
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China, liujun@ivpp.ac.cn;
4
Geology and Geophysics Program, Missouri University of Science and Technology, Rolla, MO 65409, U.S.A., yangwa@mst.edu
1

ABSTRACT—Permian dicynodonts were discovered in strata exposed on the ﬂanks of the Bogda Mountains (Xinjiang, China) in
1928. Nearly all known specimens were collected in the Guodikeng Formation (= upper Wutonggou low-order cycle); the single
exception is the holotype of Kunpania scopulusa, which originated in the underlying Quanzijie Formation. The Quanzijie
Formation is generally considered Capitanian in age, which would make Kunpania one of the oldest known bidentalian
dicynodonts, but the type of K. scopulusa has received little attention. Here we redescribe K. scopulusa and investigate its
phylogenetic relationships. Kunpania scopulusa is a valid species diagnosed by the absence of anterior palatal ridges; a robust
crista oesophagea; a prominent lateral dentary shelf; a posteriorly curving projection on the angular; and a large, triangular
attachment area for M. latissimus dorsi on the humerus. Our phylogenetic analysis recovered K. scopulusa as a stemward
member of Dicynodontoidea and the sister taxon of the South African species Sintocephalus alticeps. Depending on the precise
age of the uppermost Quanzijie Formation, three scenarios describe the potential phylogenetic implications of K. scopulusa: (1)
bidentalian dicynodonts diversiﬁed before the end-Guadalupian extinction, with little of their early history preserved; (2) the
main diversiﬁcations of cryptodont and dicynodontoid bidentalians occurred in the aftermath of the end-Guadalupian
extinction, with K. scopulusa representing the latter; (3) K. scopulusa is a contemporary of other mid–late Wuchiapingian
dicynodontoids and the initial radiation of Dicynodontoidea is not preserved in the known fossil record.
SUPPLEMENTAL DATA—Supplemental materials are available for this article for free at www.tandfonline.com/UJVP
Citation for this article: Angielczyk, K. D., J. Liu, and W. Yang. 2021. A redescription of Kunpania scopulusa, a bidentalian
dicynodont (Therapsida, Anomodontia) from the ?Guadalupian of northwestern China. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology.
DOI: 10.1080/02724634.2021.1922428

INTRODUCTION
By almost every standard, Bidentalia (sensu Kammerer and
Angielczyk, 2009) is the most successful clade of dicynodont therapsids. Not only are the two most diverse groups of late Permian
dicynodonts, the (possibly paraphyletic) Cryptodontia and the
Dicynodon-grade dicynodontoids, part of Bidentalia (e.g.,
Angielczyk et al., 2019; Kammerer, 2019a; Olivier et al., 2019;
Liu, 2020), it also includes the two dominant Triassic dicynodont
clades, Lystrosauridae and Kannemeyeriiformes. Bidentalia has
the longest temporal range of any major dicynodont clade (Fröbisch, 2008) and it achieved a global distribution, with bidentalian remains having been recovered from every continent
(Fröbisch, 2009). The clade displays considerable morphological
disparity (Ruta et al., 2013), perhaps most impressively exempliﬁed by the recent description of the elephant-size Lisowicia
bojani from the Upper Triassic of Poland (Sulej and Niedźwiedzki, 2019; although see Romano and Manucci, 2019).
Despite its ubiquity in the late Permian and the Triassic, the
early history of Bidentalia is mysterious. The presence of

*Corresponding author.
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in the article can be found
online at www.tandfonline.com/ujvp.

Published online 28 May 2021

Emydopoidea, the sister taxon of Bidentalia, in the middle
Permian (Angielczyk et al., 2005; Angielczyk and Cox, 2015;
Day et al., 2018; Day and Rubidge, 2020) implies that the clade
must have originated by this time. However, the middle
Permian fossil record of Bidentalia is almost non-existent. The
single specimen of Rastodon procurvidens from the Rio do
Rasto Formation of Brazil (Boos et al., 2016) is the only probable
bidentalian record from the Guadalupian so far described;
Australobarbarus from the Port Kotel’nich locality of Russia is
likely Lopingian in age (Kurkin, 2011; Benton et al., 2012; Sennikov and Golubev, 2017; Kammerer and Masyutin, 2018). As
expected, given its phylogenetic position, Rastodon lacks many
of the distinctive characters found in later-diverging bidentalians
(Boos et al., 2016; Simão-Oliveira et al. 2020), and it provides
only limited insight into the subsequent diversiﬁcation of Cryptodontia and Dicynodontoidea. The same is true for other potential
basal bidentalians or basal cryptodonts that occur in the Lopingian such as Keyseria or Daqingshanodon (see discussion in
Angielczyk and Kammerer, 2017), although the recent discovery
of Bulbasaurus from the Tropidostoma Assemblage Zone of
South Africa has shed new light on the early history of the
Geikiidae (Kammerer and Smith, 2017). The ‘elphids’ Elph,
Interpresosaurus, and Katumbia, from the Lopingian of Russia
and Tanzania (Kurkin, 1999, 2001; Angielczyk, 2007) may be
basal dicynodontoids, but their phylogenetic position is

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Kunpania (e1922428-2)
contentious (Angielczyk and Kammerer, 2017) and they are
contemporaries of more advanced dicynodontoids such as
Peramodon, Vivaxosaurus, Dicynodon, and Euptychognathus
instead of true early occurrences of Dicynodontoidea (Sidor
et al., 2010; Sennikov and Golubev, 2017).
Dicynodont fossils were ﬁrst discovered in the Permo-Triassic
strata exposed on the ﬂanks of the Bogda Mountains of Xinjiang
by P. Yuan in 1928 as part of the Sino-Swedish expedition of
1925–1931 led by Sven Hedin (Yuan and Young, 1934; Yuan,
1935). Nearly all of the Permian dicynodont material collected in
this area over the past eight decades originated in outcrops of the
Guodikeng Formation exposed on the northern and southern
ﬂanks of the Bogda Mountains (e.g., Lucas, 2001; Li and Sun,
2008). The Guodikeng Formation is thought to span the PermoTriassic boundary, although the exact placement of the boundary
within the formation has been the subject of much debate (see
review in Liu and Abdala, 2017). However, one important specimen,
the holotype of Kunpania scopulusa Sun, 1978 was collected lower in
the section, in the upper Quanzijie Formation (QZJ). The description of the specimen presented by Sun (1978) is quite brief, and
K. scopulusa has never been included in a modern phylogenetic
analysis. Furthermore, when discussed in the vertebrate paleontology literature, K. scopulusa generally has been portrayed as Lopingian in age, roughly coeval with the Daptocephalus Assemblage
Zone of the South African Karoo Basin, based on its frequently
assumed synonymy with Dicynodon (e.g., Lucas, 1998, 2001, 2005,
2006, 2018; Metcalfe et al., 2009). This age estimate conﬂicts with
the palynology of the QZJ and radiometric dates of surrounding
strata, however, which are more consistent with a Capitanian age
(e.g., Zhu et al., 2005; Yang et al., 2010; Liu et al., 2020). If
K. scopulusa is Capitanian, it would be a key early record of Bidentalia. Moreover, its at least superﬁcial similarity to taxa such as
Dicynodon and Daptocephalus raises the possibility that it could
be the oldest occurrence of Dicynodontoidea yet known, offering
new insight into the early stages of the clade’s evolution.
Here, we redescribe the holotype of K. scopulusa, including
new information resulting from additional preparation of the
ventral surface of the skull. We also address the persistent question of whether K. scopulusa is a valid taxon, include it in a cladistic analysis of dicynodonts for the ﬁrst time, and discuss its
potential implications for the timing and geographic location of
the early diversiﬁcation of Bidentalia.
Institutional Abbreviations—BP, Evolutionary Studies Institute, Johannesburg, South Africa; IVPP, Institute of Vertebrate
Paleontology and Paleoanthropology, Beijing, China; LPB,
Savannakhet Dinosaur Museum, Savannakhet, Laos; NHCC,
National Heritage Conservation Commission, Lusaka, Zambia;
NMT, National Museum of Tanzania, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania;
SAM, Iziko Museums of South Africa, Cape Town, South Africa.
Anatomical Abbreviations—acp, acromion process; al, tusk
alveolus; an, angular; caf, articular facet for coracoid plate; cf,
coracoid foramen; cn, cnemial crest; co, crista oesophagea; cp,
capitulum; den, dentary; dt, dentary table; dpc, deltopectoral
crest; ec, ectopterygoid; ect, ectepicondyle; en, external naris;
ent, entepicondyle; gl, gelnoid; gr, groove; h, humeral head; ipv,
interpterygoid vaculity; ju, jugal; la, lacrimal; lc, lateral
condyle; ld, latissimus dorsi insertion; lds, lateral dentary shelf;
lpf, lateral palatal foramen; mc, medial condyle; mcr, metacoracoid; mf, mandibular fenestra; mx, maxilla; na, nasal; pc, procoracoid; pds, posterior dentary sulcus; pl, palatine; pm, premaxilla,
ppr, posterior median palatal ridge; pt, pterygoid; ri, ridge; rla,
reﬂected lamina of angular; sm, septomaxilla; sq, squamosal; tr,
origin of scapular head of triceps; tro, trochlea; vo, vomer.
GEOLOGICAL SETTING
The holotype of K. scopulusa (IVPP V 4695) was collected in the
upper 18 m of the QZJ (Zhao, 1980) on cliff of gray-green sandstone

overlying a conglomerate bed (Sun, 1989). The QZJ exposed in the
Bogda Mountains was deposited in grabens of the greater TurpanJunggar intracontinental rift basin (Yang et al., 2010). The basin
was located at approximately paleo-mid-latitude of northeast
Pangea on the easternmost Kazakhstan Plate, near the northwest
coast of the Paleo-Tethys (Sengor et al., 1993; Sengor and Nat’lin,
1996; Ziegler et al., 1997; Scotese, 2001; Liu et al., 2020).
The QZJ Formation ranges from approximately 70–180 m thick,
and is composed of conglomerate, sandstone, mudrock, and paleosols (Yang et al., 2010; Obrist-Farner and Yang, 2015, 2016, 2017).
The formation contains two depositional cycles, the lower and
upper QZJ low-order cycles (LCs; Obrist-Farner and Yang, 2015).
The base of the lower QZJ LC is an erosional unconformity and disconformity with high topographic relief, juxtaposing the underlying
lacustrine deposits with the overlying meandering stream deposits.
The top of the lower QZJ LC is variable, taking the form of a disconformity, local erosional unconformity, or conformity, and it juxtaposes stacked Vertisols, Calcisols, and/or Argillisols with the
overlying upper QZJ LC. The upper QZJ LC contains laterally persistent, thick, and massive red mudrocks and laterally discontinuous
conglomerates. The former is interpreted as loess deposits and the
latter as ephemeral braided and meandering stream deposits
(Obrist-Farner and Yang, 2016, 2017). In the Dalongkou section
in Jimsar, at the northern foothills of Bogda Mountains, argillic Protosols occur within the LC; and thick Gleysols in the upper part are
overlain conformably by upper Permian lacustrine deltaic and
ﬂuvial deposits. The age of the lower and upper QZJ LCs was interpreted as Capitanian by Obrist-Farner and Yang (2015) on the basis
of absolute ages in the underlying and overlying strata reported by
Yang et al. (2010; see also XBGMR, 1993; Cai, 1999; Wartes et al.,
2002; Zhu et al., 2005; Yang et al., 2007) and cyclostratigraphic correlation between sections at the northern and southern foothills of
the Bogda Mountains (Obrist-Farner and Yang, 2015, 2016).
However, it is important to note that direct radiometric dates currently are not available for the upper QZJ LC, so it is possible
that its upper part could be early Wuchiapingian in age. An
upper bound on the minimum age of the upper QZJ LC is a date
of 254.22 Ma in the overlying Wutonggou LC (Yang et al., 2010).
Obrist-Farner and Yang (2016) suggested that the Argillisols in
the lower QZJ LC in the Dalongkou section indicate landscape
stability, a prolonged period of subaerial exposure, and subhumid
climate in the Jimsar area. The ﬂuvial-loessial deposits and argillic Protosols in the upper QZJ LC indicate subhumid conditions
alternating with arid–semiarid episodes and a change in the
atmospheric circulation pattern. The Gleysols in the uppermost
part indicate a change to subhumid–humid conditions at the
end of QZJ time. In general, persistent aridity, eolian processes,
and dust-trapping mechanisms had existed in northeast Pangea
during Capitanian time. The gradual but dramatic climatic
change from arid–semiarid to subhumid–humid conditions at
the end of the Capitanian correlates with and is the result of
the global demise of the Late Paleozoic Ice Age.
SYSTEMATIC PALEONTOLOGY
THERAPSIDA Broom, 1905
ANOMODONTIA Owen, 1860
DICYNODONTIA Owen, 1860
THEROCHELONIA Seeley, 1894
BIDENTALIA Bain vide Owen, 1860
DICYNODONTOIDEA Olson, 1944
KUNPANIA SCOPULUSA Sun, 1978
(Figs. 1A–D, 2A–E, 3A–L)
Kunpania scopulusa Sun, 1978:22
Kunpania scopulusa Zhao, 1980:37
Kunpania scopulusa Brink, 1986

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Kunpania (e1922428-3)

FIGURE 1. Skulls of Kunpania scopulusa and Sintocephalus alticeps. Photographs of the holotype of K. scopulusa (IVPP V 4695) in A, left lateral, B,
right lateral, C, anterior, and D, ventral views. The shaded area in C is the broken surface that suggests the snout tapered anteriorly to a narrow tip.
Photographs of the holotype of Sintocephalus alticeps (SAM-PK-2347) in E, dorsal, F, ventral, and G, left lateral views. Sintocephalus alticeps is recovered as the sister taxon of K. scopulusa in the phylogentic analysis and may be a useful model for the complete skull of K. scopulusa. Scale bars are
2 cm; upper scale bar applies to A–D, lower scale bar applies to E–G.

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Kunpania (e1922428-4)

FIGURE 2. Mandibles of Kunpania scopulusa and comparative specimens. Photographs of the holotype of K. scopulusa (IVPP V 4695) in A, right
lateral, B, left lateral, C, anterior, and D, dorsal views. E, photograph of the right side of the holotype of K. scopulusa (IVPP V 4695) in ventrolateral
view. Gray shading highlights the mandibular fenestra; arrows highlight the curved ridge on the angular near the likely location of the reﬂected lamina
of the angular. F, photograph of the holotype of Jimusaria sinkianensis (IVPP RV 341407) in right lateral view. A short, wide, straight ridge (arrow)
arises vertically from the reﬂected lamina. G, photograph of Diictodon feliceps (IVPP V 3260; holotype of Dicynodon tienshanensis) in left lateral view
(reﬂected for comparison). A straight, posteriorly angled ridge (arrows) arises from the reﬂected lamina. H, photograph of the holotype of
Daqingshanodon limbus (IVPP V 7940) in left lateral view (reﬂected for comparison). A straight, posteriorly angled ridge (arrows) arises from
the reﬂected lamina. I, photograph of the holotype of Taoheodon baizhijuni (IVPP V 25335) in right lateral view. A straight, posteriorly angled
ridge (arrows) arises from the reﬂected lamina. J, photograph of the holotype of Lystrosaurus youngi (IVPP V 8532) in right lateral view. A straight,
anteriorly angled ridge (arrows) arises from the reﬂected lamina. K, photograph of Compsodon helmoedi (NHCC LB211) in left lateral view.
Although the reﬂected lamina was lost during preservation, the straight, vertical ridge is still visible (arrows). Upper scale bar applies to A–D and
is 2 cm. Middle scale bar applies to E–F and is 2 cm. Lower left scale bar applies to G–J and is 2 cm. Lower right scale bar applies to K and is 1 cm.

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Kunpania (e1922428-5)

FIGURE 3. Postcrania of Kunpania scopulusa and comparative specimens. Photographs of the right scapula of holotype of K. scopulusa (IVPP V
4695) in A, lateral, B, medial, and C, posterior views. Photograph of the right coracoid plate of holotype of K. scopulusa (IVPP V 4695) in D,
lateral view. The gray overlay masks portions of the medial surface of the right mandibular ramus that are visible in the image. Right clavicle of
the holotype of K. scopulusa (IVPP V 4695) in E, anterior and F, posterior views. Right humerus of the holotype of K. scopulusa (IVPP V 4695)
in G, dorsal and H, ventral views. Left proximal tibia of the holotype of K. scopulusa (IVPP V 4695) in I, anterior, J, posterior, K, lateral, and L,
medial views. Right humerus of the crypdotont Oudenodon bainii (NMT RB27) in M, dorsal and N, ventral views. Right humerus of an indeterminate
dicynodontoid species (NMT RB44) in O, dorsal and P, ventral views.

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Kunpania (e1922428-6)
Kunpania scopulusa Cheng, 1986:209
Kunpania scopulusa King, 1988:95
Dicynodon scopulusa Lucas, 1998:84
Dicynodon scopulusa Lucas, 2001:83
Kunpania? scopulusa Li and Sun, 2008:388
Dicynodon scopulusa Kammerer et al., 2011:91
Holotype—IVPP V 4695, partial skull, partial mandible, right
scapula, right procoracoid and metacoracoid, partial right clavicle, right humerus, proximal left tibia.
Type Locality and Horizon—Gongbangou, Jimsar, Xinjiang,
China. Upper Quanzijie Formation, ?Capitanian.
Referred Material—None.
Revised Diagnosis—A large dicynodontoid diagnosed by the
following combination of characters (* = autapomorphy): anterior
lateral and median palatal ridges absent; crista oesophagea robust,
block-like; lateral dentary shelf large, dorsoventrally thick, triangular in dorsal view; small, posteriorly curving lateral projection
on the angular at the level of the mandibular fenestra; *attachment area for M. latissimus dorsi on the humerus large, triangular.
DESCRIPTION
The material of K. scopulusa described and ﬁgured by Sun
(1978) includes a partial skull, partial mandible, right scapula,
right coracoid plate, and right humerus (Figs. 1–3). In addition
to these specimens, a partial right clavicle and proximal left
tibia with the same specimen number are present in the IVPP
collections (Fig. 3). The preservation style of the latter specimens
is identical to the rest of the K. scopulusa holotype, and the size
of the elements is consistent with the other material, so we consider the clavicle and tibia to be part of the same individual.
Skull
The preserved portion of the skull has been laterally compressed and consists of the snout, the anterior section of the
left suborbital bar, and the choanal region extending back to
the median pterygoid plate (Fig. 1). The anterior tip of the premaxilla and the dorsal surface of the snout are missing. The left
side of the snout is well preserved, but the right side is heavily
damaged. The specimen is very large. Its preserved basal
length is approximately 307 mm, and this would translate to an
estimated snout-occipital condyle length of approximately
442 mm if skull proportions similar to Daptocephalus leoniceps
(based on BP/1/3927) are assumed.
The premaxillae are fused into a single element that forms the
anterior portion of the snout (Fig. 1A, D). Although the bone
surface of the snout is roughly preserved, the general path of the
premaxilla-nasal suture can be traced, and it seems clear that the
posterior tip of the ascending process of the premaxilla was not
bifurcated. The loss of the skull roof makes it impossible to
assess whether the anterior edge of the mid-frontal suture closely
approached the ascending process of the premaxilla. As preserved,
a distinct longitudinal ridge is not present on the anterior surface of
the snout, although lateral compression of the specimen gives the
area a slightly ridged appearance (Fig. 1C). The premaxillary contribution to the palatal rim narrows anteriorly, and although the tip
of the snout is damaged, it is suggestive of originally having tapered
to something resembling the hooked beak of Dinanomodon (Kammerer et al., 2011). The facial suture between the premaxilla and
maxilla is not well preserved, but it appears to have extended
from near the ventral corner of the external naris to the palatal
rim. The septomaxilla does not appear to have contacted the premaxilla along the external margin of the naris, but it is uncertain
whether a contact between the elements was present within the
narial opening (Fig. 1A).
Sutures are not well preserved on the ventral surface of the
skull, but the premaxilla seems to form the majority of the

secondary palate, as is typical of dicynodonts (Fig. 1D). Importantly, both lateral and medial anterior palatal ridges are
absent. The absence of lateral anterior palatal ridges is expected
in a bidentalian given the distribution of this character among
dicynodonts (e.g., see data matrix in Supplementary Data), but
median anterior ridges are present in nearly all members of
Bidentalia (occlusion of the lower jaw prevents the character
from being assessed in Rastodon and the ridges are somewhat
reduced in Pelanomodon; Kammerer et al., 2015; Boos et al.,
2016). A posterior median palatal ridge is present (Fig. 1C).
The ridge does not expand anteriorly, nor is it ﬂanked by
strong longitudinal depressions. Posteriorly, the premaxilla contacts the palatine and the vomer. Premaxillary teeth are absent.
The external naris is large (Fig. 1A, B). The left narial opening
is nearly circular, but the right has a ﬂatter dorsal edge, giving it
an appearance that is somewhat reminiscent of the saddleshaped naris in Dinanomodon (Kammerer et al., 2011). As is
typical in dicynodonts, the naris is surrounded by the premaxilla,
maxilla, nasal, and septomaxilla. The septomaxilla is unusually
large and has a signiﬁcant crescentic exposure on the facial
surface of the skull, forming the entire posterior rim of the
naris and preventing the lacrimal from reaching the narial
margin (Fig. 1A). A shallow postnarial depression is present
near the posterodorsal corner of the naris.
The maxilla contributes to the facial and palatal portions of the
skull (Fig. 1A, B, D). On the facial surface, the maxilla meets the
premaxilla along a short suture near the ventral corner of the external naris. As preserved, the suture is ﬂush with the surrounding surfaces of the snout, not located in a groove as in Oudenodon
(Keyser, 1975). The large facial exposure of the septomaxilla and
the lacrimal appear likely to prevent a contact between the nasal
and maxilla, and a prefrontal-maxilla contact also seems very unlikely, although the prefrontal-lacrimal suture cannot be clearly discerned. Posteriorly, the posterior process of the maxilla extends
towards the zygomatic arch. A small fragment of bone present at
the posterior end of the preserved area of the suborbital bar
appears to be the anteriormost tip of the squamosal. Assuming
this identiﬁcation is correct, a maxilla-squamosal contact is present.
The caniniform processes are broken off at the level of the palatal
rim on both sides of the skull, so it is uncertain how far they
extended ventrally (Fig. 1A, B). As preserved the caniniform
process merges smoothly with the palatal rim and there is no evidence of the notch in the palatal rim seen in pylaecephalids (e.g.,
Angielczyk and Sullivan, 2008; Angielczyk and Rubidge, 2010).
The medial surface of the palatal rim anterior to the caniniform
process is smooth and lacks the embayment common in emydopoids
(e.g., Kammerer and Angielczyk, 2009). A weakly developed lateral
caniniform buttress is present, but it lacks a posterior furrow. The
posterior margin of the caniniform process merges smoothly with
the suborbital bar and pterygoid girder, and there is no postcaniniform keel or crest.
Sutures between the premaxilla and maxilla are not well preserved on the ventral surface of the skull, but it appears that
the maxilla formed the lateral margins of the secondary palate
and much of the palatal rim (Fig. 1D). The maxilla contacts the
ectopterygoid, pterygoid, and palatine posteriorly, although
damage associated with lateral compression has led to the displacement of some of these elements on the left side of the skull.
Maxillary ‘postcanine’ teeth are absent, but tusks are present in
IVPP V 4695. The left tusk is broken off at the level of the
palatal rim, but the root is still embedded in the maxilla. A
portion of the right tusk alveolus is visible within the broken
right maxilla, but the right tusk itself is not preserved (Fig. 1B).
The left side of the specimen indicates that the erupted portion
of the tusk was located anterior to the anterior orbital margin.
Only the anteriormost portion of the nasals is preserved. Anteriorly, the nasals contact the ascending process of the premaxilla
along a v-shaped suture (Fig. 1A), but too little of the mid-nasal

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Kunpania (e1922428-7)
suture is preserved to determine whether an anterior process of the
frontal approached the premaxilla. As preserved, strongly developed nasal bosses are not present. However, general damage to
the nasals and rough preservation of the bone surface make it
unclear how well the preserved appearance reﬂects the original
morphology. Some large vascular pits are present on the surface
of the nasals, which are comparable to those seen in Turfanodon
(Kammerer et al., 2011). As noted above, the septomaxilla and
lacrimal may separate the nasal from the maxilla.
Part of the lacrimal is preserved on the left side of the skull,
although the sutures delimiting it are difﬁcult to trace (Fig.
1A). The facial portion of the lacrimal likely was approximately
square. An anterior contact with the nasal is almost certain, but it
is less clear if the lacrimal originally contacted the septomaxilla.
If a lacrimal-septomaxilla contact was present, the large facial
exposure of the septomaxilla would exclude the lacrimal from
the rim of the external naris. It is unclear if a small portion of
the prefrontal is preserved (a prefrontal-lacrimal suture is not
obvious), but the conﬁguration of the nasal, lacrimal, and septomaxilla preclude the presence of a prefrontal-maxilla contact.
Posteriorly, the lacrimal forms the anteroventral corner of the
orbital rim. A change in bone surface color from gray to red
appears to mark the approximate boundary between the lacrimal
and the jugal on the ventral rim of the orbit. The lacrimal contacts the maxilla ventrally, but breakage has resulted in the loss
of much of the external expression of this suture.
The anterior portion of the jugal is preserved on the left side of
the skull (Fig. 1A). It contacts the lacrimal anteriorly and the
maxilla ventrally, and contributes to the ﬂoor of the orbit. A
contact between the jugal and the palatine likely was present
medially, but damage to this area on both sides of the skull
makes this uncertain. IVPP V 4695 is too damaged to determine
whether a labial fossa (sensu Angielczyk, 2001) was present.
Parts of the vomer are visible on the ventral surface of IVPP V
4695 (Fig. 1D). The anterior end of the mid-ventral vomerine
plate is visible near the anterior end of the choanal space, where it
contacts the posterior end of the premaxilla. The plate is very
thin, of constant width, and lacks a ventral trough. At the posterior
end of the choanal space, the vomer bifurcates to form the anterior
margins of the teardrop-shaped interpterygoid vacuity. Assuming an
original basal skull length of about 44 cm (see above), the length of
the interpterygoid vacuity is about 8% of basal skull length, a value
that is lower than that observed in most basal bidentalians, cryptodonts, and Dicynodon-grade dicynodontoids, although it is close to
values seen in some lystrosaurids and kannemeyeriiforms.
Although it is not fully exposed on either side of the specimen,
the palatine seems to have the typical form of dicynodonts, consisting of an anterior pad that contacts the secondary palate and a
plate-like posterior section that forms part of the choanal roof
(Fig. 1D). The palatine pad is best preserved on the right side
of the specimen, where it is oval and has a somewhat rugose
surface texture. This rugosity is of a constant degree for the
length of the pad, in contrast to the palatines of cryptodonts,
which have a raised, rugose posterior section and a smoother
anterior section that is ﬂush with the premaxillary secondary
palate (e.g., Angielczyk, 2002). There is no evidence of a palatine
foramen that pierces the palatine pad. Anteriorly, the palatine
pad contacts the maxilla and premaxilla. Based on consistent
aspects of cranial architecture across dicynodonts, the palatine
likely also contacted the vomer, ectopterygoid, pterygoid, and
jugal, but these sutures are not clearly preserved in IVPP V
4695. An oval lateral palatal foramen can be seen on the left
side of the skull at the level of the palatine pad.
It is difﬁcult to state with certainty whether an ectopterygoid
was present in IVPP V 4695. The best evidence of this element
is found on the right side of the specimen, where a slightly
raised, lozenge-shaped piece of bone is present between the posterior surface of the caniniform process and the anterior end of

the anterior pterygoid ramus (Fig. 1B). The size, shape, and position of this piece of bone is similar to ectopterygoids seen in
other Permian bidentalians, and a somewhat interdigitated
suture appears to be visible slightly posterior to it. Therefore, we
tentatively identify this area as a poorly preserved ectopterygoid.
The pterygoids of dicynodonts consist of three main portions: the
anterior pterygoid rami, which extend between the snout and
median pterygoid plate, framing the choana; the median pterygoid
plate, which is situated between the choana and the basicranium,
and the posterior (or quadrate) rami, which arise from the posterolateral surface of the median pterygoid plate and extend posteriorly
to wedge between the quadrate, squamosal, and paroccipital
process. The anterior rami and the median pterygoid plate are
more or less complete in IVPP V4695, but the posterior rami are
not preserved (Fig. 1D). The lateral compression that has affected
the specimen has caused the left anterior ramus to be displaced
from its contact with the snout, but the right anterior ramus
seems to be close to its original position. The anterior rami are relatively straight in ventral view and contact the maxilla, ectopterygoid,
and palatine anteriorly. The right side of the specimen indicates that
a low anterior keel was present on the ventral edge of the anterior
ramus. More posteriorly, the anterior ramus bears a thin ventral
ridge that converges with the crista esophagea on the median pterygoid plate (best seen on the left side of the specimen).
The median pterygoid plate seems to be fairly wide relative to
basal skull length (about 13% of skull length, assuming a length
of about 44 cm) (Fig. 1D), more similar to the condition in
Rastodon and Dicynodon-grade dicynodontoids than to the
somewhat narrower median plates typical of most cryptodonts.
Anteriorly, the median plate forms the posterior margin of the
interpterygoid vacuity and contacts the vomer. Twisting of the
choanal region has resulted in the ventral margins of the interpterygoid vacuity more closely approaching the level of the
ventral surface of the median pterygoid plate on the left side of
the skull than on the right side. However, it appears that the
margins of the vacuity were dorsal to the level of the median
plate originally. New preparation of IVPP V 4695 has revealed
the crista oesophagea for the ﬁrst time. It is robust and blocklike, with a rounded, somewhat rugose ventral surface. In this
way, the crista is more similar to those of some more basal dicynodonts, such as Eosimops (Angielcyk and Rubidge, 2013), than
it is to the thinner and more blade-like cristae of most basal
bidentalians, cryptodonts, and Dicynodon-grade dicynodontoids.
Mandible
The preserved portion of the mandible of IVPP V 4695 consists of the symphysis and the anterior portion of both mandibular rami (Fig. 2A–E). Slightly more of the right ramus is
preserved than the left. The right coracoid plate is preserved
lying across the medial surface of the right mandibular ramus.
The overall appearance of the mandible is reminiscent of that
of Daptocephalus leoniceps (e.g., BP/1/3927, SAM-PK-K10494;
also see Ewer, 1961).
As is typical for dicynodonts, the left and right dentaries are
fused (Fig. 2A–D). Some cracks are visible in the symphyseal
region, but there is no evidence of a suture between the dentaries. The symphysis is robust and blocky in appearance, with
a ﬂat anterior surface that is roughly perpendicular to the
lateral surfaces. The surface details are roughly preserved, but
the remains of a longitudinal ridge appear to be present on the
anterior surface of the symphysis (Fig. 2C). As preserved, this
ridge appears to have been more strongly developed ventrally,
becoming less well-deﬁned moving towards the dorsal margin
of the jaw. The dorsal edge of the symphysis forms an upturned
beak that projects above the dorsal surface of the jaw rami,
and it bears a median groove along its posterior surface, similar
to the morphology seen in most bidentalians. In lateral view,

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Kunpania (e1922428-8)
there is some evidence of a curved ridge that follows the proﬁle
of the symphysis on the right side of the mandible. A comparable
ridge is not evident on the left side of the specimen, but this could
be a preservational artifact. Sutures between the dentary and the
splenial cannot be clearly discerned, so it is uncertain whether
the splenial possessed an anterior process that contributed to
the symphysis.
In dorsal view, the symphysis is relatively elongate anteroposteriorly (Fig. 2D). Dentary tables (sensu Angielczyk and
Rubidge, 2013) are present. Each table is bounded medially by
a low ridge that forms the lateral wall of the median groove on
the posterior surface of the symphyseal beak. The dorsal
surface of the dentary table is slightly ventrolaterally angled.
The posterior dentary sulcus is visible on the left side of the
mandible (it is obscured by the coracoid plate on the right
side). As typical of bidentalians, it is relatively narrow mediolaterally and dorsoventrally deep (Angielczyk and Rubidge, 2013).
A thin ridge projects laterally from the lateral wall of the posterior dentary sulcus on the left side of the mandible, but a comparable feature is not evident on the right side. Anteriorly, the
sulcus grades into the dentary table and it extends posteriorly
over the preserved length of the dorsal surface of the dentary.
Dentary teeth are absent.
A prominent lateral dentary shelf is present on the lateral
surface of the mandible, overhanging the mandibular fenestra
(Fig. 2A, B, D). The dorsal surface of the shelf is ﬂat, and its
anterior and posterior edges angle laterally and meet near its
midpoint, giving the shelf a triangular appearance in dorsal
view that is reminiscent of the morphology seen in Dicynodontoides (Cox, 1959). On the left side of the mandible, it appears
that the shelf grades anteriorly into a sub-circular swelling
similar to that observed in most bidentalians, although the area
is imperfectly preserved. In lateral view the shelf is quite thick
dorsoventrally, differentiating Kunpania from dicynodontoids,
such as Jimusaria or Daptocephalus, in which the shelf is also prominent but much thinner dorsoventrally (e.g., IVPP RV 341407,
BP/1/3927; also see Yuan and Young, 1934; Ewer, 1961). The
lateral surface of the shelf on the left side of the mandible
bears an oval depression (Fig. 2B) that is somewhat reminiscent
of the lateral fossa that has been described in Kombuisia (Fröbisch, 2007; Fröbisch et al., 2010). However, we consider this
feature to represent damage in IVPP V 4695 because a corresponding depression is not present on the right side (Fig. 2A).
The mandibular fenestra is more completely preserved on the
right side of the mandible and is framed by the dentary and the
angular (Fig. 2E). The dorsal margin of the fenestra is straight
and formed by the ventral surface of the lateral dentary shelf,
whereas the ventral margin bows ventrally. Aside from its contribution to the mandibular fenestra, little of the angular is preserved in IVPP V 4695. The only noteworthy character of the
preserved portion of the angular is a small lateral projection
just behind the posterior margin of the mandibular fenestra
(Fig. 2E), which King (1988) described as a protuberance for
muscular attachment and included in her diagnosis of
K. scopulusa. Anteriorly, this projection is a rounded swelling
that curves ventrally; posteriorly, the swelling grades into a thin
horizontal shelf. The bone surface of the ventral portion of the
swelling appears to be damaged, so it might have been more prominent originally. The projection is close to the expected origin
of the reﬂected lamina of the angular and may have been associated with that structure when the jaw was complete.
Postcrania
The scapula is a robust element, and the blade is strongly
concave medially, presumably to match the contour of the
body wall (Fig. 3A–C). The preserved straight-line dorsoventral
length of the scapula is approximately 307 mm, and the element

is approximately 340 mm long when measured along the curve of
the blade. The lateral surface of the scapula is smooth and gently
convex, and there is no evidence of a prominent lateral crest
along the anterior edge, such as that seen in Dicynodontoides
(Cox, 1959). A prominent, sub-triangular acromion process is
present, although its dorsal margin is a smooth vertical continuation of the anterior edge of the scapula instead of a more horizontal surface that projects anteriorly from the edge of the
scapula. Ventral to the acromion process the scapula widens to
form the glenoid and the articular surface for the coracoid
plate. A shallow fossa is present on the lateral surface of the
base of the scapula, just above the articular surface for the procoracoid,
which
may
represent
the
origin
of
M. supracoracoideus (DeFauw, 1986). The glenoid of the
scapula is oval and projects strongly medially. The articular
surface is relatively ﬂat and appears to have faced posterolaterally when the scapula was in life position. A raised, oval rugosity
located just above the glenoid on the posterior surface of the
scapula appears to represent the origin of the scapular head of
M. triceps. Anterior to the glenoid, a deep groove that widens
ventrally is present on the medial surface of the scapula. The cleithrum appears to be absent. There is no sign of the element itself
among the preserved material, and the anterior margin of the
scapula lacks a fossa to receive it.
The right coracoid plate is preserved lying across the medial
side of the right dentary ramus, so only the lateral surface of
the plate is visible (Fig. 3D). The procoracoid is roughly rectangular, and it completely encloses the coracoid foramen. As
preserved, the metacoracoid is triangular, with the apex directed
posteriorly. However, its ventral edge is somewhat damaged, so it
probably was more crescent-shaped originally, similar to the
metacoracoids of other dicynodonts. The glenoid portion of the
metacoracoid is strongly demarcated by a rounded rim that overhangs the lateral and posterior surfaces of the element. In lateral
view, the glenoid is convex dorsally, giving it a domed appearance. The procoracoid and metacoracoid meet along a slightly
undulating suture near the midpoint of the coracoid plate, but
it is unclear whether the procoracoid would have contributed
to the glenoid when all of the pectoral elements were in
articulation.
The clavicle is boomerang-shaped in anterior view, and the
medial end is missing (Fig. 3E, F). The lateral end is also
damaged, but it is complete enough to show that the element
widened dorsoventrally as it approached the scapula. Matrix
still partially covers the anterior surface of the clavicle, but it is
sufﬁciently exposed to show that it is slightly convex. The posterior surface is ﬂat near the medial end of the element.
Moving laterally, the ventral half of the surface becomes gently
concave, whereas the surface dorsal to it forms a rounded,
convex surface. As a result, the posterior surface is convex dorsally and concave ventrally at its (preserved) lateral end, presumably to facilitate articulation with the scapulocoracoid. The
preserved length of the clavicle is 220 mm.
The right humerus is one of the more complete postcranial
elements, with only part of the deltopectoral crest missing and
minor damage to the ectepicondyle, but many surface details
are obscured by repaired breaks and rough preservation of the
bone surface (Fig. 3G, H). The overall shape of the humerus is
similar to that of many cryptodonts (e.g., Angielczyk et al.,
2009:ﬁg. 4), particularly the seemingly square shape of the deltopectoral crest. The humerus is approximately 301 mm long, with
proximal, mid-shaft, and distal widths of 168 mm, 92 mm, and
174 mm, respectively. The proximal and distal ends are offset
by approximately 31°.
The humeral head is narrower anteroposteriorly than proximodistally, giving it an oval shape that contrasts with the anteroposteriorly wider heads of many dicynodonts (Fig. 3G). It
extends well onto the dorsal surface of the humerus, and its

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Kunpania (e1922428-9)
long axis is angled slightly posteriorly relative to the long axis of
the humerus. The head is located on a broadly rounded central
ridge that narrows towards the midshaft region. Posterior to
this ridge, the dorsal surface bears a wide fossa that extends
from near the proximal edge of the element to the attachment
area for M. latissimus dorsi. The rounded insertion of
M. subcoracoscapularis is located at the corner between the
proximal and posterior edges of the humerus, and it has an
unusual oval depression on its posterior surface that trends proximodistally. Just proximal to the mid-shaft, a prominent, triangular process projects posteriorly from the posterior edge of
humerus. We interpret this as a homologue of the “pinna-like
process” of DeFauw (1986:123), representing the insertion of
M. latissimus dorsi (e.g., King, 1981; DeFauw, 1986; Angielczyk
and Kurkin, 2003). Although they might be slightly exaggerated
by damage, the size and shape of this process in K. scopulusa are
unusual and the process may represent an autapomorphy for the
species. Anteriorly, the dorsal surface of the deltopectoral crest is
slightly depressed relative to the central ridge. The deltopectoral
crest is damaged, but it appears to have had a squared-off shape
similar to that found in many cryptodonts (Fig. 3M, N) instead of
the more rounded shape typical of dicynodontoids (Fig. 3O, P).
Most of the ventral surface of the proximal half of the humerus
is occupied by a triangular depression that narrows towards the
midshaft region and likely represents the insertion of
M. coracobrachialis (e.g., King, 1981; DeFauw, 1986; Ray and
Chinsamy, 2003; Angielczyk et al., 2009). The ectepicondylar
foramen is absent.
The distal half of the humerus expands from the mid-shaft
constriction to about the same anteroposterior width as the
proximal end (Fig. 3G, H). The ectepicondyle is damaged
but appears to have been relatively robust and dorsoventrally
thickened, with an approximately diamond-shaped crosssection. The proximal apex of this diamond likely represents
the remains of a low supinator crest. In contrast to the ectepicondyle, the entepicondyle is more ﬂattened dorsoventrally.
Posterior to the ectepicondyle, the central portion of the
dorsal surface of the distal humerus is relatively ﬂat. Distal
to this ﬂattened region, parts of the trochlea and capitulum
extend onto the dorsal surface of the humerus, and they
form one continuous articular surface. On the ventral
surface of the distal humerus, a raised area extends diagonally
from the distal margin of the deltopectoral crest to the entepicondyle. This area typically is pierced by the entepicondylar
foramen in dicynodonts, but the foramen is still ﬁlled with
matrix in IVPP V 4695. A subtriangular fossa is located
anterior to the raised area, with its apex directed towards
the entepicondyle. The anterior margin of this fossa is
framed by the oval ventral portion of the capitulum. The
ventral expression of the trochlea is much smaller and is
elongated anteroposteriorly.
The proximal end and most of the diaphysis of the left tibia
are preserved (Fig. 3I–L). The preserved length of the element
is 197 mm, the proximal width is 137 mm, and the approximate
mid-shaft width is 59 mm. The proximal articular surface is
oval and its anterior margin ﬂares dorsally, forming a prominent raised anterior rim. A low, rounded ridge divides the
articular surface into distinct facets for the lateral and
medial condyles of the femur. The cnemial crest is weakly
developed, consisting of little more than the corner between
the anterior and lateral sides of the proximal end of the
element. A prominent sulcus is present on the lateral surface
of the tibia. It begins slightly posterior and distal to the
cnemial crest, and is narrower towards the proximal end,
widening distally. The medial surface of the diaphysis also
bears a longitudinal sulcus near the proximal end, but this
gradually ﬂattens such that the surface is convex near the preserved end of the tibia.

PHYLOGENETIC ANALYSIS
Methods
To investigate the phylogenetic relationships of K. scopulusa,
we added it to a version of data matrix of Liu (2020) that we
modiﬁed in several ways. The Liu (2020) matrix is a useful starting point because it includes several new dicynodont species that
were described by Kammerer (2018, 2019a, b), Kammerer et al.
(2019), Olivier et al. (2019), and Liu (2020), as well as three new
characters that were added by Kammerer (2019a). It also encompasses the most recent taxonomic revision of Dicynodon-grade
dicynodontoids (Kammerer, 2019a), which may be relevant in
establishing the phylogenetic placement of Kunpania. We
further increased the taxon sample of the data matrix by
adding codings for Abajudon and Kembawacela from Olroyd
et al. (2018) and Angielczyk et al. (2019). Finally, we made
several updates to character state codings for Biseridens,
Suminia, Tiarajudens, Turfanodon, Lystrosaurus hedini, and
Jachaleria (see Supplemental Data for details).
The ﬁnal dataset included 114 OTUs and 197 characters (Supplemental Data). Of these characters, 174 are discrete binary or
multistate characters, of which seven characters were ordered
and 167 were treated as unordered. All discrete-state characters
were weighted equally. The remaining 23 characters are continuous. We treated the continuous characters as additive using the
method of Goloboff et al. (2006), with mean values used as the
codings for the OTUs except in cases when only a single
measurement was available for an OTU. Unknown and inapplicable discrete state and continuous characters were coded as ‘?’
(Strong and Lipscomb, 2000).
We conducted a parsimony analysis of the dataset using TNT 1.5
(October 2019 version) (Goloboff et al., 2008; Goloboff and Catalano, 2016), using two tree search strategies. The ﬁrst search used
the new technology methods of TNT, speciﬁcally a driven search
with the initial search level set at 65, which was checked every
ﬁve hits. The initial number of addition sequence replicates was
1,000, and the search was required to ﬁnd the shortest length
trees 20 times. The analysis started with default settings for sectorial searching, tree drifting, parsimony ratchet and tree fusing. In
the second analysis, we used the traditional search method of
TBR branch swapping with 10,000 replicates and 10 trees held
per replicate. Biarmosuchus served as the outgroup to root the
most parsimonious cladograms from both analyses.
We utilized symmetric resampling (Goloboff et al., 2003), jackknife analysis (Mueller and Ayala, 1982; Farris et al., 1996) and
decay analysis (Bremer, 1988, 1994) to measure support for the
most parsimonious cladograms. The symmetric resampling
results are based on 10,000 replicates with a change probability
of 33%; each replicate included a new technology search with
default settings for tree drifting, parsimony ratchet and tree
fusing, and 10 random addition sequence replicates. Absolute
frequency values were used to summarize the results (Kopuchian
and Ramírez, 2010). For the jackknife analysis of clade support
we utilized 10,000 resampling replicates, with a 36% probability
of character removal, and the same search parameters as for the
symmetric resampling analysis. The decay analysis results are
based on a sample of 904,707 suboptimal cladograms with
lengths up to six steps longer than the most parsimonious cladograms. Following the recommendations of Goloboff et al. (2008),
the suboptimal trees were generated through a series of traditional searches in which the length of suboptimal cladograms
retained as well as the number of suboptimal cladograms were
incrementally increased. The resulting cladograms were ﬁltered
to remove duplicates before the decay analysis, so all 904,707 cladograms in the sample are unique. Finally, a 50% majority-rule
consensus of the 904,707 cladograms was calculated to gain
insight into how frequently the clades recovered in the most parsimonious cladograms are represented in suboptimal trees.

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Kunpania (e1922428-10)
Results
Three most parsimonious cladograms of length 1223.362 steps
(consistency index = 0.226; retention index = 0.714) were recovered by the new technology search, and one additional cladogram was found by the traditional search. The strict consensus
of the four cladograms can be found in Figure 4. Kunpania was
nested well within Bidentalia in the most parsimonious cladograms, falling within Dicynodontoidea as the sister taxon of the
South African species Sintocephalus alticeps. One unambiguous
discrete-state synapomorphy supports the sister-group relationships of Sintocephalus and Kunpania: anterior tip of snout
rounded (character (ch.) 12 state (st.) 0). More broadly, ﬁve
unambiguous discrete-state synapomorphies support Dicynodontoidea (here treated as all descendants of the common ancestor of Basilodon woodwardi and Kannemeyeria simocephalus):
keel-like extension of the palatal rim posterior to the caniniform
process absent (ch. 31, st. 0); zygomatic portion of the squamosal
without folded edge (ch. 61, state 0; unknown in Kunpania);
contact of pterygoid and maxilla present (ch. 90, st. 1); intertuberal ridge present (ch. 103, st. 1; unknown in Kunpania and
Sintocephalus); lateral dentary shelf present and well-developed
(ch. 127, st. 2; unknown in Sintocephalus). Three unambiguous
discrete-state synapomorphies support Bidentalia: keel-like
extension of the palatal rim posterior to the caniniform process
absent (ch. 30, st. 0); parietals exposed in midline groove or
channel (ch. 49, st. 1; unknown in Kunpania); prootic rectangular
alar process that forms a plate raised above surface of temporal
fenestra wall, in front of fossa absent (ch. 108, st. 0; unknown in
Kunpania and Sintocephalus). Finally, ﬁve unambiguous discretestate synapomorphies support Bidentalia exclusive of Rastodon:
basisphenoid contribution to the basisphenoid-basioccipital
tubera slopes anterodorsally at a steeper angle such that the
parabasisphenoid contribution is still somewhat ridge-like but
the portion of the ridge on the anterior surface of the tuber is
more vertically oriented (ch. 98, st. 1; unknown in Kunpania
and Sintocephalus); jaw ramus straight in dorsal view bends
strongly laterally posterior to symphysis (ch. 115, st. 1;
unknown in Sintocephalus); lateral dentary shelf present but
relatively small (ch. 127, st. 1; altered in dicynodontoids; see
above); anterodorsal edge of lateral dentary shelf developed
into a rounded swelling (ch. 128, st. 2; unknown in Sintocephalus);
lateral dentary shelf a thin ventrolaterally directed sheet that
forms the dorsal margin of the mandibular fenestra (ch. 129, st.
1; 0 in Kunpania and unknown in Sintocephalus).
The results of the symmetric resampling, jackknife, and decay
analyses indicate that the most parsimonious cladograms are
weakly supported overall (Fig. 4; also see Figs. S1–S4), and that
support for the placement of K. scopulusa within Dicynodontoidea also is weak. The branches surrounding it decay in 0.172 steps
and mostly have symmetric resampling and jackknife values
under 50%. Support for Bidentalia including K. scopulusa is
slightly more robust. However, the hypothesized relationships
for K. scopulusa in the most parsimonious cladograms also are
found in 90% of the 904,707 cladograms used in the decay analysis (Fig. 4).
DISCUSSION
Taxonomic Status of Kunpania scopulusa
The holotype of K. scopulusa is the only known specimen of
the species, and its fragmentary nature and incomplete preparation have resulted in differing conclusions about the validity
of the genus and species following Sun’s (1978) initial description. King (1988) was the ﬁrst author to consider whether
K. scopulusa was valid, and she retained both the genus and
the species. She included features of the dorsal surface of the
dentary in her diagnosis of Kunpania (King, 1988:95): “Groove

on biting surface of the mandible and another placed laterally
… similar to Dicynodon except for the lateral groove on the
dentary which is quite distinctive.” From this wording it is somewhat unclear what characters she is referencing, but we suspect
the groove on biting surface of the mandible corresponds to
the median groove on the posterior surface of the symphyseal
beak, and the lateral groove is either the dentary table or the posterior dentary sulcus. However, her characterization of the
dentary table and/or posterior dentary sulcus as being quite distinctive is surprising because similar morphologies were well
documented in other Dicynodon-grade dicynodonts at the time
King was writing (e.g., Ewer, 1961; Cluver and Hotton, 1981;
King, 1981).
Lucas (1998, 2001) synonymized the genus Kunpania with
Dicynodon, but retained the species D. scopulusa as valid. Like
King (1988), Lucas used characters of the mandible in his diagnosis, speciﬁcally the long mandibular fenestra, the prominent
lateral dentary shelf, and the presence of a fossa dorsal to the
shelf. However, he later reconsidered this conclusion and
instead suggested that K. scopulusa was a nomen dubium
(Lucas, 2005). This taxonomy has been carried forward in subsequent works (e.g., Lucas 2006, 2018; Metcalfe et al., 2009),
although it is clear that Lucas considers K. scopulusa to
conform to his conception of Dicynodon because it is the basis
for his contention that the QZJ can be correlated with the
Dicynodon (now Daptocephalus; Viglietti, 2020) Assemblage
Zone of the Karoo Basin.
Li and Sun (2008) tentatively treated K. scopulusa as a distinct
and valid taxon, but their diagnosis simply paraphrases that of
King (1988) and does not add any new information. Most
recently, Kammerer et al. (2011) included K. scopulusa (as Dicynodon scopulusa) in their comprehensive taxonomic revision of
Dicynodon. They noted similarities between IVPP V 4965 and
the holotype of Jimusaria sinkianensis (anterior angulation of
the tusks, long lateral dentary shelf), but they also observed
that the much larger size of K. scopulusa made it unlikely to be
a synonym of J. sinkianensis. Ultimately, they left the taxonomic
status of K. scopulusa unresolved, and suggested that additional,
better preserved material might be necessary to settle the issue.
Our re-examination of IVPP V 4695 has uncovered several
additional characters of K. scopulusa that can be used to diagnose the species. Perhaps the most obvious of these characters
is the apparent absence of anterior median palatal ridges.
Although these ridges are absent in some non-bidentalian dicynodonts (e.g., many emydopoids), they are present in all other
members of Bidentalia for which this character can be assessed.
Therefore, while not a true autapomorphy (i.e., a unique character state found only in K. scopulusa), the absence of anterior
median palatal ridges differentiates K. scopulusa from other
bidentalians, including all other taxa described from the
Permian of China. Admittedly, the secondary palate of IVPP
V4695 is imperfectly preserved and the initial preparation it
received was coarse. Kammerer et al. (2015) documented that
the relatively small anterior palatal ridges of Pelanomodon
could sometimes appear to be absent in poorly preserved or prepared specimens. This raises the possibility that the absence of
anterior ridges in IVPP V 4695 is also an artifact. However,
because the area in question was still covered in matrix before
our additional preparation was undertaken, and no evidence of
the ridges was found during the new preparation, we consider
the absence of ridges to be a genuine character.
The robust, block-like crista oesophagea is another distinctive
character in K. scopulusa. As with the absence of the anterior
median ridges, this is not a true autapomorphy because a similarly
wide crista oesophagea can be found in several stemward dicynodonts such as Eodicynodon, Colobodectes, Lanthanostegus, and
Eosimops (Rubidge, 1990; Modesto et al., 2003a, b; Angielczyk
and Rubidge, 2009, 2013). However, among bidentalians only

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Kunpania (e1922428-11)

FIGURE 4. Strict consensus of four most parsimonious cladograms from the phylogenetic analysis. Scores: 1223.362 steps; consistency index = 0.226;
retention index = 0.714. Support values are shown for non-kannemeyeriiform dicynodontoids and the basal node of Kannemeyeriiformes. Numbers at
nodes represent decay index (left/top), symmetric resampling (middle), and the percentage of the 904,707 suboptimal trees in which the node is
resolved (bottom/right). Results of the jackknife analysis are similar to those of the symmetric resampling analysis. For complete support values,
including jackknife results, see Supplemental Data.

Kitchinganomodon has a crista esophagea that approaches the
morphology of K. scopulusa, which is part of the former taxon’s
unusual pterygoid morphology (Maisch, 2002).

A third potential diagnostic character of K. scopulusa is the
small lateral projection on the angular posterior to the mandibular fenestra. The projection is only preserved on the right side of

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Kunpania (e1922428-12)
the mandible because the corresponding area of the angular is
missing on the left side. However, nothing about the right side
of the mandible suggests that the projection is an artifact of preservation or preparation, so we interpret it as being a real morphological feature. King (1988; also see Li and Sun, 2008)
included it in her diagnosis of K. scopulusa, suggesting that it
may have served as a muscle attachment. However, the position
of the projection on the angular near the posterior margin of the
mandibular fenestra is close to the point of origin of the reﬂected
lamina of the angular in dicynodonts, so it may be associated with
that structure instead. Many dicynodonts possess a vertical or
subvertical ridge on the angular posterior to the mandibular
fenestra that supports the base of the reﬂected lamina and that
often continues dorsally to near the edge of the mandible. The
projection in IVPP V 4695 differs from this morphology in
curving posteriorly at the level of the mandibular fenestra, and
there is no dorsal continuation towards the margin of the mandible. Moreover, it seems unlikely that the projection’s unusual morphology is the result of breakage: specimens in which the reﬂected
lamina has been broken off often still possess a clear vertical ridge,
not a horizontal structure (Fig. 2K). Mandibles are known for all
other currently recognized Chinese Permian dicynodont genera
except Turfanodon bogdaensis and the unnamed cryptodont
from the Sunjiagou Formation (Yuan and Young, 1934; Sun,
1973; Zhu, 1989; Liu, 2020; Yi and Liu, 2020), and none shows a
comparable projection in this area of the angular (Fig. 2F–J).
Therefore, even if the projection is associated with the reﬂected
lamina, it is still useful for differentiating K. scopulusa from
other dicynodonts and raises the possibility that the reﬂected
lamina had an unusual morphology in the species.
In the postcranial skeleton, the large, triangular process for the
attachment of M. latissimus dorsi on the posterior surface of the
humerus is perhaps the most unequivocal autapomorphy for
K. scopulusa. Although it has been known for some time that a
“pinna-like” process for the latissimus dorsi is widely distributed
among bidentalian dicynodonts (e.g., DeFauw, 1986; also see discrete-state character 152 in the current data matrix), typically it is
a low, sinuous, dorsoventrally ﬂattened ridge on the posterior
surface of the humeral diaphysis (Fig. 3M–P). We are unaware
of any other described dicynodont species whose humerus
bears such a prominent process. This character, along with the
relatively narrow but well-deﬁned humeral head, raise the possibility of some functional specialization in the forelimb in
K. scopulusa. The scapulocoracoid and the clavicle seem more
generalized, however, and a detailed functional analysis of the
forelimb would beneﬁt from the discovery of more complete,
better preserved material.
Taken together, these observations indicate that despite its
poor preservation, the holotype of K. scopulusa presents a
suite of diagnostic characters that is distinct from other dicynodont species, including at least one autapomorphy. Therefore,
we uphold Kunpania scopulusa as valid. It is also important to
note that K. scopulusa falls well away from the two currently
recognized species of Dicynodon in our most parsimonious cladograms, indicating that previous suggestions that K. scopulusa
can be treated as part of Dicynodon (Lucas, 1998, 2001; Kammerer et al., 2011) are unlikely to be correct. The hypothesized
sister group relationship between Kunpania and Sintocephalus
is interesting because it raises the possibility that the more completely known skull of Sintocephalus (Fig. 1E–G) could be used
as a model for predicting anatomical features that are not
preserved in IVPP V 4965. In particular, the temporal bar of
Sintocephalus differs from most other Dicynodon-grade dicynodontoids in being relatively wide anteriorly and having greater
exposure of the parietals on the skull roof (Kammerer et al.,
2011). This morphology might be a useful search image for identifying other potential specimens of K. scopulusa if additional
collecting in the QZJ is undertaken.

The Age and Phylogenetic Implications of Kunpania
scopulusa
As noted above, the lower and upper QZJ LCs are generally
considered to be Capitanian in age on the basis of palynology,
radiometric dates, and cyclostratigraphic correlations (Zhu et al.,
2005; Yang et al., 2010; Obrist-Farner and Yang, 2015, 2016).
However, the age of the uppermost QZJ is somewhat poorly constrained because the radiometric dates that bracket the QZJ are
based on samples from the underlying Hongyanchi and overlying
Wutonggou LCs, which are stratigraphically well separated from
the top of the QZJ LC (Yang et al., 2010). Therefore, although
we can say that K. scopulusa is older than 254.22 Ma (the age of
the date from the Wutonggou LC; Yang et al., 2010), it is difﬁcult
to determine precisely how much older. We will consider three
possible ages for K. scopulusa in our discussion of its phylogenetic
implications (Fig. 5): (1) a late Capitanian age (i.e., >260 Ma;
roughly equivalent to the Diictodon–Styracocephalus Subzone of
the Tapinocephalus Assemblage Zone in the Karoo Basin; Day
and Rubidge, 2020); (2) an early–mid Wuchiapingian age (i.e.,
∼257 Ma; roughly equivalent to the Tropidostoma–Gorgonops
Subzone of the Endothiodon Assemblage Zone in the Karoo
Basin; Day and Smith, 2020); and (3) a mid–late Wuchiapingian
age (i.e., ∼255 Ma; roughly equivalent to the Cistecephalus Assemblage Zone of the Karoo Basin; Smith, 2020).
If K. scopulusa is late Capitanian in age (Scenario 1; lower line
in Fig. 5), it would be one of only two bidentalian dicynodonts
deﬁnitively known from the Capitanian (the other being
Rastodon procurvidens from the Rio do Rasto Formation of
Brazil; Boos et al., 2016) and the only member of Dicynodontoidea recorded from this interval. Assuming this scenario is
correct, it implies that the early part of Bidentalian history is
extremely poorly sampled because it requires ghost lineages of
varying lengths for the elphids (sensu Angielczyk and Kammerer, 2017), all of the traditional cryptodont lineages, and at
least three dicynodontoid lineages (Basilodon, Sintocephalus,
and ‘higher’ dicynodontoids). These numerous ghost lineages
also would indicate that the diversiﬁcation of Bidentalia began
before the end-Guadalupian extinction. Indeed, the situation
implied by this scenario, with a disaster taxon (Diictodon; Day
et al., 2018) ﬂourishing in the extinction’s aftermath while a signiﬁcant diversiﬁcation takes place out of sight echoes the situation with Lystrosaurus and the radiation of kannemeyeriiform
dicynodonts following the end-Permian extinction (e.g., Fröbisch, 2008; Ruta et al., 2013). Finally, Scenario 1 necessitates
that bidentalians achieved a global distribution very quickly
given the presence of Rastodon in southwestern Gondwana
and Kunpania in northeastern Laurasia presumably shortly
after the origin of the clade.
An early–mid Wuchiapingian age for K. scopulusa (Scenario 2;
middle line in Fig. 5) is more consistent with the known fossil
record of Bidentalia. This age would make it a contemporary
of early members of several cryptodont lineages such as
Australobarbarus,
Tropidostoma,
Rhachiocephalus,
and
Bulbasaurus (e.g., Sennikov and Golubev, 2017; Kammerer and
Masyutin, 2018; Day and Smith, 2020). Kunpania would still be
the oldest known dicynodontoid, in keeping with its relatively
stemward position on the phylogeny, and it would help to resolve
the ghost lineage that currently exists at the base of Dicynodontoidea. In terms of the end-Guadalupian extinction, Scenario 2
implies that although bidentalians originated before the extinction
(as documented by Rastodon), their main radiation did not occur
until after the event. The biogeographic expansion of Bidentalia
would be relatively rapid, with several taxa present in Gondwana
as well as Kunpania and Australobarbarus in Laurasia, but it too
would likely follow the end-Guadalupian extinction.
The mid–late Wuchiapingian age for K. scopulusa used in
Scenario 3 (upper line in Fig. 5) results in essentially no

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Kunpania (e1922428-13)

FIGURE 5. Phylogeny of bidentalian dicynodonts with the approximate stratigraphic ranges of included taxa plotted against the Standard Global
Chronostratigraphic Scale (SGCS) and the vertebrate biozonation of the Beaufort Group (Karoo Basin, South Africa). The terms ‘cryptodonts’
and ‘dicynodontoids’ are used informally to refer to the bidentalians that are sometimes recovered in a monophyletic Cryptodontia and non-kannemeyeriiform Dicynodontoidea, respectively. Capitanian records of the sister group of Bidentalia (Emydopoidea) and the bidentalian Rastodon indicate that the clade diverged in the middle Permian. The stratigraphic range shown for Kunpania encompasses the three alternative age estimates for
the upper Quanzijie Formation discussed in the main text; the actual range for the genus was likely shorter. A Capitanian age for Kunpania (Scenario
1; S1) implies that the bidentalian radiation began before the end-Guadalupian extinction and that much of the clade’s early history is unsampled. An
early Wuchiapingian age (Scenario 2; S2) implies that the main bidentalian radiation occurred after the end-Guadalupian extinction and helps to
resolve the dicynodontoid ghost lineage. A mid–late Wuchiapingian age (Scenario 3; S3) would make Kunpania a contemporary of other dicynodontoids, offering little insight into the early history of Bidentalia. Black stratigraphic ranges correspond to taxa known primarily or exclusively from the
South African Karoo Basin and are taken from Smith et al. (2020); white stratigraphic ranges correspond to taxa known primarily or exclusively from
outside the Karoo Basin. The Capitanian age of Rastodon is based on its co-occurrence with dinocephalians in the Rio do Rasto Formation (e.g.,
Olroyd and Sidor, 2017). Ranges for the Chinese taxa (Daqingshanodon, Jimusaria, Kunpania, Lystrosaurus hedini, Taoheodon, Turfanodon) are
based primarily on correlations presented in Liu (2018) and Liu et al. (2020). The range of Daqingshanodon has been shown as equivalent to that
of Turfanodon based on the presence of Jimusaria- and Turfanodon-like dicynodonts in the Naobaogou Formation (Liu, 2019). The range of
L. hedini assumes the presence of one Lystrosaurus species in western China whose range spans the Guodikeng, Jiucaiyuan, and Shaofanggou formations (see Liu, 2018 for ages). Ranges for the Laotian taxa (Counillonia, Repelinosaurus) reﬂect uncertainty over whether they are late
Permian or Early Triassic in age (Olivier et al. 2019; Liu 2020). Ranges for Russian taxa (Australobarbarus, Elph, Idelesaurus, Interpresosaurus,
Peramodon, Delectosaurus, Vivaxosaurus) are based on Sennikov and Golubev (2017). Ranges for Scottish taxa (Geikia elginensis, Gordonia) are
based on the broad correlation between the Cuttie’s Hillock Sandstone Formation, the Hopeman Sandstone, and the Daptocephalus Assemblage
Zone (e.g., Lucas, 2018). Ranges for taxa best known from Tanzania and Zambia (Euptychognathus, Dicynodon angielczyki, Daptocephalus
huenei, Geikia locusticeps, Katumbia, Syops) are based on the hypothesis that the Usili Formation and upper Madumabisa Mudstone Formation
span the boundary between the Cistecephalus and Daptocephalus assemblage zones of the Karoo Basin (Angielczyk and Kammerer, 2017; Angielczyk,
2019). The Early Triassic occurrence of Kannemeyeriiformes is based on the presence of Sungeodon in the Early Triassic Jiucaiyuan Formation
(Maisch and Matzke, 2014). Abbreviations: Cap, Capitanian; Chx, Changhsingian; Ci, Cistecephalus Assemblage Zone; Di–St, Diictodon–
Styracocephalus Subzone (Tapinocephalus Assemblage Zone); Dy–Th, Dicynodon–Theriognathus Subzone (Daptocephalus Assemblage Zone);
Eo-Gl, Eosimops–Glanosuchus Subzone (Tapinocephalus Assemblage Zone); Ind, Induan; Ld, Lystrosaurus declivis Assemblage Zone; Lm–Mo,
Lystrosaurus maccaigi–Moschorhinus Subzone (Daptocephalus Assemblage Zone); Ly–Eu, Lycosuchus–Eunotosaurus Subzone (Endothiodon
Assemblage Zone); Ole, Olenekian; Tr, Triassic; Tr–Go; Tropidostoma–Gorgonops Subzone (Endothiodon Assemblage Zone); Wuc, Wuchiapingian.

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Kunpania (e1922428-14)
improvement in our knowledge of the early history of Bidentalia
or Dicynodontoidea. Currently, the oldest members of Dicynodontoidea have their ﬁrst occurrences in the mid–late Wuchiapingian Cistecephalus Assemblage Zone strata in the Karoo
Basin or time-equivalent strata in other basins (e.g., Fröbisch,
2008; Sidor et al., 2010; Angielczyk et al., 2014; Sennikov and
Golubev, 2017; Liu, 2020; Smith, 2020), and K. scopulusa would
be a contemporary of these taxa. A ghost lineage of about
three million years would separate the oldest dicynodontoids
from their sister group (Geikiidae in the most parsimonious
cladograms recovered here), which ﬁrst appears in the
Tropidostoma–Gorgonops Subzone of the Endothiodon Assemblage Zone in the Karoo Basin (Day and Smith, 2020). Consistent with this missing history, dicynodontoids would have
achieved a near global distribution by the time they ﬁrst
appear in the fossil record, and the tempo and mode of their
diversiﬁcation following the end-Guadalupian extinction would
remain uncertain.
At this time, it is difﬁcult to state which of these scenarios is
most strongly supported. Scenario 1 is most consistent with
current biostratigraphic and geochronologic estimates for the
QZJ as a whole but suffers from the fact that the age of the uppermost QZJ is not well constrained. It is also problematic because
of the substantial number of ghost lineages it requires. Although
Scenario 2 requires a modest extension of the length of time represented by the upper QZJ LC, it is attractive because it ﬁts well
with dicynodont phylogeny and suggests that the diversiﬁcation
of both cryptodonts and dicynodontoids began shortly after the
end-Guadalupian extinction. Scenario 3 is congruent with
Lucas’ contention that K. scopulusa can be used as an index
fossil to make correlations with Dicynodon- or dicynodontoidbearing strata in other basins (e.g., Lucas, 1998, 2001, 2005,
2006, 2018; Metcalfe et al., 2009), but it requires that the age of
the upper QZJ LC has been signiﬁcantly underestimated and
the lower Wutonggou LC represents a very short period of
time. A full resolution of this issue will only be possible with
improved geochronologic data for the Permian strata exposed
in the Bogda Mountains.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank H.-L. Fu for undertaking additional preparation of
IVPP V 4695. J. Lungmus provided assistance during collections
visits. Photos in Fig. 1E–G were taken by C. Kammerer. Funding
for this research was provided by NSF EAR-1714829 (to K.D.A.),
NSF EAR-1714749 (to W.Y.), and Strategic Priority Research
Program of CAS (XDB26000000) and NSFC 41661134047 (to
J.L.). We thank the two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments
that improved the quality of the manuscript.
ORCID
Jun Liu

http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2205-9671

LITERATURE CITED
Angielczyk, K. D. 2001. Preliminary phylogenetic analysis and stratigraphic congruence of the dicynodont anomodonts (Synapsida;
Therapsida). Palaeontologia Africana 37:53–79.
Angielczyk, K. D. 2002. Redescription, phylogenetic position, and stratigraphic signiﬁcance of the dicynodont genus Odontocyclops (synapsida: Anomodontia). Journal of Paleontology 76:1047–1059.
Angielczyk, K. D. 2007. New specimens of the Tanzanian dicynodont
“Cryptocynodon” parringtoni von Huene, 1942 (Therapsida,
Anomodontia), with an expanded analysis of Permian dicynodont
phylogeny. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 27:116–131.
Angielczyk, K. D. 2019. First occurrence of the dicynodont Digalodon
(Therapsida, Anomodontia) from the Lopingian upper

Madumabisa Mudstone Formation, Luangwa Basin, Zambia.
Palaeontologia Africana 53:219–225.
Angielczyk, K. D., and C. B. Cox. 2015. Distinctive emydopoid dicynodont (Therapsida, Anomodontia) mandibles from the Permian
Ruhuhu and Usili formations (Songea Group), Ruhuhu Basin,
Tanzania. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 35:e1008699.
Angielczyk, K. D., and C. F. Kammerer. 2017. The cranial morphology,
phylogenetic position, and biogeography of the upper Permian dicynodont Compsodon helmoedi van Hoepen (Therapsida,
Anomodontia). Papers in Palaeontology 3:513-545.
Angielczyk, K. D., and A. A. Kurkin. 2003. Phylogenetic analysis of
Russian Permian dicynodonts (Therapsida: Anomodontia): implications for Permian biostratigraphy and Pangaean biogeography.
Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 139:157–212.
Angielczyk, K. D., and B. S. Rubidge. 2009. The Permian dicynodont
Colobodectes cluveri (Therapsida, Anomodontia), with notes on
its ontogeny and stratigraphic range in the Karoo Basin, South
Africa. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 29:1162–1173.
Angielczyk, K. D., and B. S. Rubidge. 2010. A new pylaecephalid dicynodont (Therapsida, Anomodontia) from the Tapinocephalus
Assemblage Zone, Karoo Basin, Middle Permian of South Africa.
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 30:1396–1409.
Angielczyk, K. D., and B. S. Rubidge. 2013. Skeletal morphology, phylogenetic relationships and stratigraphic range of Eosimops newtoni
Broom, a pylaecephalid dicynodont (Therapsida, Anomodontia)
from the Middle Permian of South Africa. Journal of Systematic
Palaeontology 11:191–231.
Angielczyk, K. D., and C. Sullivan. 2008. Diictodon feliceps (Owen, 1876),
a dicynodont (Therapsida, Anomodontia) species with a Pangaean
distribution. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 28:788–802.
Angielczyk, K. D., J. Benoit, and B. S. Rubidge. 2019. A new tusked cistecephalid dicynodont (Therapsida, Anomodontia) from the upper
Permian upper Madumabisa Mudstone Formation, Luangwa Basin,
Zambia. Papers in Palaeontology 7:405–446.
Angielczyk, K. D., J. Fröbisch, and R. M. H. Smith. 2005. On the stratigraphic range of the dicynodont taxon Emydops (Therapsida:
Anomodontia) in the Karoo Basin, South Africa. Palaeontologia
Africana 41:23–33.
Angielczyk, K. D., C. A. Sidor, S. J. Nesbitt, R. M. H. Smith, and L. A.
Tsuji. 2009. Taxonomic revision and new observations on the postcranial skeleton, biogeography, and biostratigraphy of the dicynodont genus Dicynodontoides, the senior subjective synonym of
Kingoria (Therapsida, Anomodontia). Journal of Vertebrate
Paleontology 29:1174–1187.
Angielczyk, K. D., J.-S. Steyer, C. A. Sidor, R. M. H. Smith, R. L.
Whatley, and S. Tolan. 2014. Permian and Triassic dicynodont
(Therapsida: Anomodontia) faunas of the Luangwa Basin,
Zambia: taxonomic update and implications for dicynodont biogeography and biostratigraphy; pp. 93–138 in Kammerer, C. F., K. D.
Angielczyk, and J. Fröbisch (eds.), Early Evolutionary History of
the Synapsida. Springer, Dordrecht.
Benton, M. J., A. J. Newell, A. Y. Khlyupin, I. S. Shumov, G. D. Price, and
A. A. Kurkin. 2012. Preservation of exceptional vertebrate assemblages in Middle Permian ﬂuviolacustrine mudstones of
Kotel’nich, Russia: stratigraphy, sedimentology, and taphonomy.
Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 319–320:58–
83.
Boos, A. D. S., C. F. Kammerer, C. L. Schultz, M. B. Soares, and A. L. R.
Ilha. 2016. A new dicynodont (Therapsida: Anomodontia) from the
Permian of southern Brazil and its implications for bidentalian
origins. PLOS One 11:e0155000.
Bremer, K. 1988. The limits of amino acid sequence data in angiosperm
phylogenetic reconstruction. Evolution 42:795–803.
Bremer, K. 1994. Branch support and tree stability. Cladistics 10:295–304.
Broom, R. 1905. On the use of the term Anomodontia. Albany Museum
Records 1:266–269.
Brink, A. S. 1986. Illustrated bibliographical catalogue of the Synapsida.
Geological Survey of South Africa Handbook 10.
Cai, T. 1999. Stratigraphy of Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region.
Wuhan, China University of Geosciences Press, 430pp. [in
Chinese with English abstract].
Cheng, Z. 1986. Vertebrates; pp.207–218 in Permian and Triassic Strata
and Fossil Assemblages in the Dalongkou Area of Jimsar,
Xinjiang. People’s Republic of China Ministry of Geology and
Mineral Resources Geological Memoirs Series 2 3. [in Chinese].

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Kunpania (e1922428-15)
Cluver, M. A., and N. Hotton III. 1981. The genera Dicynodon and
Diictodon and their bearing on the classiﬁcation of the
Dicynodontia (Reptilia, Therapsida). Annals of the South African
Museum 83:99–146.
Cox, C. B. 1959. On the anatomy of a new dicynodont genus with evidence of the position of the tympanum. Proceedings of the
Zoological Society of London 132:321–367.
Day, M. O., and B. S. Rubidge. 2020. Biostratigraphy of the
Tapinocephalus Assemblage Zone (Beaufort Group, Karoo
Supergroup), South Africa. South African Journal of Geology
123:149–164.
Day, M. O., and R. M. H. Smith. 2020. Biostratigraphy of the
Endothiodon Assemblage Zone (Beaufort Group, Karoo
Supergroup), South Africa. South African Journal of Geology
123:165–180.
Day, M. O., R. B. J. Benson, C. F. Kammerer, and B. S. Rubidge. 2018.
Evolutionary rates of mid-Permian tetrapods from South Africa
and the role of temporal resolution in turnover reconstruction.
Paleobiology 44:347–367.
DeFauw, S. L. 1986. The Appendicular Skeleton of African Dicynodonts.
Ph.D. Dissertation, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, 284
pp.
Ewer, R. F. 1961. The anatomy of Daptocephalus leoniceps (Owen).
Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London 136:375–402.
Farris, J. S., V. A. Albert, M. Källersjö, D. Lipcomb, and A. G. Kluge.
1996. Parsimony jackkniﬁng outperforms neighbor-joinning.
Cladistics 12:99–124.
Fröbisch, J. 2007. The cranial anatomy of Kombuisia frerensis Hotton
(Synapsida, Dicynodontia) and a new phylogeny of anomodont
therapsids. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 150:117–144.
Fröbisch, J. 2008. Global diversity of anomodonts (Tetrapoda,
Therapsida) and the terrestrial rock record across the PermianTriassic Boundary. PloS ONE 3(11):e3733.
Fröbisch, J. 2009. Composition and similarity of global anomodontbearing tetrapod faunas. Earth-Science Reviews 95:119–157.
Fröbisch, J., K. D. Angielczyk, and C. A. Sidor. 2010. The Triassic dicynodont Kombuisia (Synapsida, Anomodontia) from Antarctica, a
refuge from the terrestrial Permian-Triassic mass extinction.
Naturwissenschaften 97:187–196.
Goloboff, P. A., and S. A. Catalano. 2016. TNT version 1.5, including a
full implementation of phylogenetic morphometrics. Cladistics
32:221–238.
Goloboff, P. A., J. S. Faris, and K. C. Nixon. 2008. TNT, a free program for
phylogenetic analysis. Cladistics 24:774–786.
Goloboff, P. A., C. I. Mattoni, and A. S. Quinteros. 2006. Continuous
characters analyzed as such. Cladistics 22:589–601.
Goloboff, P. A., J. A. Farris, M. Källersjö, B. Oxelman, M. J. Ramírez, and
C. A. Szumik. 2003. Imporvements to resampling measures of group
support. Cladistics 19:324–332.
Kammerer, C. F. 2018. The ﬁrst skeletal evidence of a dicynodont from
the lower Elliot Formation of South Africa. Palaeontologia
Africana 52:102–128.
Kammerer, C. F. 2019a. Revision of the Tanzanian dicynodont
Dicynodon huenei (Therapsida: Anomodontia) from the Permian
Usili Formation. PeerJ 7:e7420.
Kammerer, C. F. 2019b. A new dicynodont (Anomodontia:
Emydopoidea) from the terminal Permian of KwaZulu-Natal,
South Africa. Palaeontologia Africana 53:179–191.
Kammerer, C. F., and K. D. Angielczyk. 2009. A proposed higher taxonomy of anomodont therapsids. Zootaxa 2018:1–24.
Kammerer, C. F., and V. Masyutin. 2018. Gorgonopsian therapsids
(Nochnitsa gen. nov. and Viatkogorgon) from the Permian
Kotelnich locality of Russia. PeerJ 6:e4954.
Kammerer, C. F., and R. M. H. Smith. 2017. An early geikiid dicynodont
from the Tropidostoma Assemblage Zone (late Permian) of South
Africa. PeerJ 5:e2913.
Kammerer, C. F., K. D. Angielczyk, and J. Fröbisch. 2011. A comprehensive taxonomic revision of Dicynodon (Therapsida, Anomodontia)
and its implications for dicynodont phylogeny, biogeography, and
biostratigraphy. Society of Vertebrate Paleontology Memoir 11:1–
158.
Kammerer, C. F., K. D. Angielczyk, and J. Fröbisch. 2015. Redescription
of the geikiid Pelanomodon (Therapsida, Dicynodontia), with a
reconsideration of ‘Propelanomodon’. Journal of Vertebrate
Paleontology 36: e1030408. DOI:10.1080/02724634.2015.1030408.

Kammerer, C. F., P. A. Viglietti, P. J. Hancox, R. J. Butler, and J. N.
Choiniere. 2019. A new kannemeyeriiform dicynodont
(Ufudocyclops mukanelai, gen. et sp. nov.) from Subzone C of the
Cynognathus Assemblage Zone, Triassic of South Africa, with
implications for biostratigraphic correlation with other African
Triassic faunas. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 39: e1596921.
DOI: 10.1080/02724634.2019.1596921.
Keyser, A. W. 1975. A re-evaluation of the cranial morphology and systematics of some tuskless anomodonts. Memoirs of the Geological
Survey of South Africa 67:1–110.
King, G. M. 1981. The functional anatomy of a Permian dicynodont.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society Series B 291:243–
322.
King, G. M. 1988. Anomodontia. Handbuch der Paläoherpetologie, 17 C.
Gustav Fischer Verlag, Stuttgart, 174 pp.
Kopuchian, C., and M. J. Ramírez. 2010. Behaviour of resampling
methods under different weighting schemes, measures and variable
sampling strengths. Cladistics 26:86–97.
Kurkin, A. A. 1999. A new dicynodont from the Malaya Severnaya Dvina
River excavations. Paleontological Journal 33:297–301.
Kurkin, A. A. 2001. New Late Permian dicynodonts from the Vyazniki
Assemblage of terrestrial deposits of eastern Europe.
Paleontological Journal 35:53–59
Kurkin, A. A. 2011. Permian anomodonts: paleobiogeography and distribution of the group. Paleontological Journal 45:432–444.
Li, J., and A. Sun. 2008. Subclass Synapsida; pp. 379–417 in Li, J., X. Wu,
and F. Zhang (eds.) The Chinese Fossil Reptiles and Their Kin.
Second Edition. Science Press, Beijing.
Liu, J. 2018. New progress on the correlation of Chinese terrestrial
Permo-Triassic strata. Vertebrata PalAsiatica 56:327–342.
Liu, J. 2019. The tetrapod fauna of the upper Permian Naobaogou
Formation of China– 4. the diversity of dicynodonts. Vertebrata
PalAsiatica 57:173–180.
Liu, J. 2020. Taoheodon baizhijuni, gen. et sp. nov. (Anomodontia,
Dicynodontoidea), from the upper Permian Sunjiagou Formation
of China and its implications. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology.
DOI: 10.1080/02724634.2020.1762088.
Liu, J., and F. Abdala, 2017. Therocephalian (Therapsida) and chroniosuchian (Reptilomorpha) from the Permo-Triassic transitional
Guodikeng Formation of the Dalongkou Section, Jimsar,
Xinjiang, China. Vertebrata PalAsiatica 55:24–40.
Liu, J., J. Yi, and J.-Y. Chen. 2020. Constraining assembly time of some
blocks on eastern margin of Pangea using Permo-Triassic nonmarine tetrapod records. Earth-Science Reviews 207:103215.
Lucas, S. G. 1998. Toward a tetrapod biochronology of the Permian;
pp. 71–91 in Lucas, S. G., J. W. Estep, and J. M. Hoffer (eds.),
Permian Stratigraphy and Paleontology of the Robledo
Mountains, New Mexico. New Mexico Museum of Natural
History and Science Bulletin 12.
Lucas, S. G. 2001. Chinese Fossil Vertebrates. Columbia University Press,
New York, 375pp.
Lucas, S. G. 2005. Age and correlation of Permian tetrapod assemblages
from China; pp. 187–191 in Lucas, S. G., and K. E. Zeigler (eds.),
The Nonmarine Permian. New Mexico Museum of Natural
History and Science Bulletin 30.
Lucas, S. G. 2006. Global Permian tetrapod biostratigraphy and biochronology; pp. 65–93 in Lucas, S. G., G. Cassinis, and J. W. Schneider
(eds.), Non-Marine Permian Biostratigraphy and Biochronology.
Geological Society, London Special Publication 265.
Lucas, S. G. 2018. Permian tetrapod biochronology, correlation and evolutionary events; pp. 405–444 in Lucas, S. G., and S. Z. Shen (eds.),
The Permian Timescle. Geological Society, London Special
Publication 450.
Maisch, M. W. 2002. Observations on Karoo and Gondwana vertebrates.
Part 4: The taxonomic status of the Late Permian rhachiocephalid
Platycyclops crassus Broom, 1948 (Therapsida: Dicynodontia)
from the South Africa Karoo. Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und
Paläontologie, Monatshefte 2202:362–372.
Maisch, M. W., and A. T. Matzke. 2014. Sungeodon kimkraemerae
n. gen. n. sp., the oldest kannemeyeriiform (Therapsida,
Dicynodontia) and its implications for the early diversiﬁcation of
large herbivores after the P/T boundary. Neues Jahrbuch für
Geologie und Paläontologie, Abhandlungen 272:1–12.
Metcalfe, I., C. B. Foster, S. A. Afonin, R. S. Nicoll, R. Mundil, W.
Xiaofeng, and S. G. Lucas. 2009. Stratigraphy, biostratigraphy and

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Kunpania (e1922428-16)
C-isotopes of the Permian–Triassic non-marine sequence at
Dalongkou and Lucaogou, Xinjiang Province, China. Journal of
Asian Earth Sciences 36:503–520.
Modesto, S. P., B. S. Rubidge, and J. Welman. 2003a. A new dicynodont
therapsid from the lowermost Beaufort Group, Upper Permian of
South Africa. Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences 39:1755–1765.
Modesto, S. P., B. Rubidge, I. Visser, and J. Welman. 2003b. A new basal
dicynodont from the Upper Permian of South Africa.
Palaeontology 46:211–223.
Mueller, L. D., and F. J. Ayala. 1982. Estimation and interpretation of
genetic distance in empirical studies. Genetical Research 40:127–137.
Obrist-Farner, J., and W. Yang. 2015. Nonmarine time-stratigraphy in a
rift setting: An example from the Mid-Permian lower Quanzijie
low-order cycle, Bogda Mountains, NW China: Journal of
Palaeogeography 4:27-51.
Obrist-Farner, J., and W. Yang. 2016. Implications of loess and ﬂuvial
deposits on paleoclimatic conditions during an icehouse–hothouse
transition, Capitanian upper Quanzijie low-order cycle, Bogda
Mountains, NW China. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology,
Palaeoecology 441:959–981.
Obrist-Farner, J., and W. Yang. 2017. Provenance and depositional conditions of ﬂuvial conglomerates and sandstones and their controlling processes in a rift setting, mid-Permian lower and upper
Quanzijie low order cycles, Bogda Mountains, NW China. Journal
of Asian Earth Sciences 138:317–340.
Olivier, C., B. Battail, S. Bourquin, C. Rossignol, J.-S. Steyer, and N.-E.
Jalil. 2019. New dicynodonts (Therapsida, Anomodontia) from the
near the Permo-Triassic boundary of Laos: implications for survivorship across the Permo-Triassic mass extinction and the paleobiogeography of Southeast Asian blocks. Journal of Vertebrate
Paleontology 39: e1584745. DOI: 10.1080/02724634.2019.1584745.
Olroyd, S. L., and C. A. Sidor. 2017. A review of the Guadalupian
(middle Permian) global tetrapod fossil record. Earth-Science
Reviews 171:583–597.
Olroyd, S. L., C. A. Sidor, and K. D. Angielczyk. 2018. New materials of
the enigmatic dicynodont Abajudon kaayi (Therapsida,
Anomodontia) from the lower Madumabisa Mudstone Formation,
middle Permian of Zambia. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology
37: e1403442. DOI: 10.1080/02724634.2017.1403442.
Olson, E. C. 1944. Origin of mammals based upon cranial morphology of
the therapsid suborders. Geological Society of America Special
Paper 55:1–136.
Owen, R. 1860. On the orders of fossil and recent Reptilia, and their distribution in time. Report of the Twenty-Ninth Meeting of the British
Association for the Advancement of Science, 1859:153–166.
Ray, S., and A. Chinsamy. 2003. Functional aspects of the postcranial
anatomy of the Permian dicynodont Diictodon and their ecological
implications. Palaeontology 46:151–183.
Romano, M., and F. Manucci. 2019. Resizing Lisowicia bojani: volumetric
body mass estimate and 3D reconstruction of the giant Late Triassic
dicynodont. Historical Biology. DOI: 10.1080/08912963.2019.1631819.
Rubidge, B. S. 1990. Redescription of the cranial morphology of
Eodicynodon oosthuizeni (Therapsida: Dicynodontia). Navorsinge
van die Nasionale Museum Bloemfontein 7:1–25.
Ruta, M., K. D. Angielczyk, J. Fröbisch, and M. J. Benton. 2013.
Decoupling of morphological disparity and taxic diversity during
the adaptive radiation of anomodont therapsids. Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London Series B 280:20131071.
Scotese, C. R., 2001. Atlas of Earth History vol. 1. PALEOMAP Project,
Arlington, 52 pp.
Seeley, H. G. 1894. Researches on the structure, organisation, and classiﬁcation of the fossil Reptilia. Part IX., Section 1. On the
Therosuchia. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B
185:987–1018.
Sengor, A.M.C., and B. A. Natal’in. 1996. Paleotectonics of Asia: fragments of a synthesis; pp. 486–640 in: A. Yin, and T M. Harrison
(eds.), The Tectonic Evolution of Asia. Cambridge University
Press, New York.
Sengor, A.M.C., B. A. Natal’in, and V S. Burtman. 1993. Evolution of the
Altaid tectonic collage and Palaeozoic crustal growth in Eurasia.
Nature 364:299–307.
Sennikov, A. G., and V. K. Golubev. 2017. Sequence of Permian tetrapod
faunas of Eastern Europe and the Permian–Triassic ecological crisis.
Paleontological Journal 51:600–611.

Sidor, C. A., K. D. Angielczyk, D. M. Weide, R. M. H. Smith, S. J. Nesbitt,
and L. A. Tsuji. 2010. Tetrapod fauna of the lowermost Usili
Formation (Songea Group, Ruhuhu Basin) of southern Tanzania,
with a new burnetiid record. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology
30:696–703.
Simão-Oliveira, D. de, L. Kerber, and F. L. Pinheiro. 2020. Endocranial
morphology of the Brazilian Permian dicynodont Rastodon
procurvidens (Therapsida: Anomodontia). Journal of Anatomy
236:384–397.
Smith, R. M. H. 2020. Biostratigraphy of the Cistecephalus Assemblage
Zone (Beaufort Group, Karoo Supergroup), South Africa. South
African Journal of Geology 123:181–190.
Smith, R. M. H., B. S. Rubidge, M. O. Day, and J. Botha. 2020.
Introduction to the tetrapod biozonation of the Karoo
Supergroup. South African Journal of Geology 123:131–140.
Strong, E. E., and D. Lipscomb. 2000. Character coding and inapplicable
data. Cladistics 15:363–371.
Sulej, T., and G. Niedźwiedzki. 2019. An elephant-sized Late Triassic
synapsid with erect limbs. Science 363:78–80.
Sun, A. 1973. Permo-Triassic dicynodonts from Turfan, Sinkiang.
Memoirs of the Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and
Paleoanthropology Academia Sinica 10:53–68.
Sun, A. 1978. Two new genera of Dicynodontidae. Memoirs of the
Institute of vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology,
Academia Sinica 13:19–25. [in Chinese]
Sun, A. 1989. Before the Dinosaurs: Land Vertebrates of China 200
Million Years Ago. China Ocean Press, Beijing, 109pp.
Viglietti, P. A. 2020. Biostratigraphy of the Daptocephalus Assemblage
Zone (Beaufort Group, Karoo Supergroup), South Africa. South
African Journal of Geology 123:191–206.
Wartes, M. A., A. R. Carroll, and T. J. Greene. 2002. Permian sedimentary record of the Turpan–Hami basin and adjacent regions, northwest China: constraints on postamalgamation tectonic evolution.
Geological Society of America Bulletin 114:131–152.
Xinjiang Bureau of Geology and Mineral Resources (XBGMR), 1993.
Regional geology of Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region.
Geological Memoirs, Series 1 32:1–762. [in Chinese with English
abstract]
Yang, W., Q. Feng, Y. Liu, N. Tabor, D. Miggins, J. L. Crowley, J. Lin, and
S. Thomas. 2010. Depositional environments and cyclo- and chronostratigraphy of uppermost Carboniferous–Lower Triassic ﬂuvial–
lacustrine deposits, southern Bogda Mountains, NW China – A terrestrial paleoclimatic record of mid-latitude NE Pangea. Global and
Planetary Change 73:15–113.
Yang, W., Y. Q. Liu, Q. Feng, J. Y. Lin, D. W. Zhou, and D. Wang. 2007.
Sedimentary evidence on Early to Late Permian mid-high latitude
continental climate variability, southern Bogda Mountains, NW
China: Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology
252:239–258.
Yi, J., and J. Liu. 2020. Pareiasaur and dicynodont fossils from upper
Permian of Shouyang, Shanxi, China. Vertebrata PalAsiatica
58:16–23
Yuan, P. L. 1935. The discovery of theromorph reptiles in the Mesozoic
strata, on the north of Tianshan. Geograﬁska Annaler 17:225–228.
Yuan, P. L., and C. C. Young. 1934. On the discovery of a new Dicynodon
in Sinkiang. Bulletin of the Geological Society of China 13:563–573.
Ziegler, A. M., M. L. Hulver, and D. B. Rowley. 1997. Permian world
topography and climate; pp. 111–146 in Martini, I. P. (ed.), Late
Glacial and Postglacial Environmental Changes: Pleistocene,
Carboniferous–Permian, and Proterozoic. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
Zhao, X. 1980. Mesozoic vertebrates and strata in northern Xinjiang.
Memoirs of the Institute of Vertebrate Palaeontology and
Palaeoanthropology, Academia Sinica 15:1–119. [in Chinese]
Zhu, H.-C., S. Ouyang, J.-Z Zhan, Z. Wang. 2005. Comparison of
Permian palynological assemblages from the Junggar and Tarim
Basins and their phytoprovincial signiﬁcance. Review of
Palaeobotany and Palynology 136:181–207.
Zhu, Y. 1989. The discovery of dicynodonts in Daqingshan Mountain, Nei
Mongol (Inner Mongolia). Vertebrata PalAsiatica 27:9–27.
Submitted November 3, 2020; revisions received January 8, 2021;
accepted January 10, 2021.
Handling Editor: Pia A. Viglietti.

