438

438

Article

by Saswati Bandyopadhyay1* and Sanghamitra Ray2

Gondwana Vertebrate Faunas of India: Their Diversity and
Intercontinental Relationships
1

Geological Studies Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, 203 B. T. Road, Kolkata 700108, India; email: saswati@isical.ac.in
Department of Geology and Geophysics, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 721302, India; email: sray@gg.iitkgp.ac.in
*Corresponding author
2

(Received : 23/12/2018; Revised accepted : 11/09/2019)
https://doi.org/10.18814/epiiugs/2020/020028

The twelve Gondwanan stratigraphic horizons of
India have yielded varied vertebrate fossils. The oldest
fossil record is the Endothiodon-dominated multitaxic
Kundaram fauna, which correlates the Kundaram
Formation with several other coeval Late Permian
horizons of South Africa, Zambia, Tanzania,
Mozambique, Malawi, Madagascar and Brazil. The
Permian-Triassic transition in India is marked by
distinct taxonomic shift and faunal characteristics and
represented by small-sized holdover fauna of the
Early Triassic Panchet and Kamthi fauna. The Middle
and Late Triassic saw extensive radiations of the
indigenous and living faunas in the form of new
temnospondyls, varied archosauromorphs, the basal
dinosaurs, non-mammalian cynodonts and
mammaliaforms. All the Triassic Gondwanan horizons
of India can be correlated with other horizons around
the world, resulting in precise biostratigraphic
correlation. The Triassic-Jurassic transition in India
show marked biotic turnover, which may have resulted
from global warming and volcanism. On a Pangaean
landscape, the Indian Gondwanan vertebrate
assemblages reflect major transformations in vertebrate
evolution, global faunal transitions, and constitute
important biostratigraphic markers.

Introduction
The Late Palaeozoic terrestrial communities were dominated by
the stem-amphibians (temnospondyls) and non-mammalian synapsids,
whereas the diapsids remained a minor component (Padian and Sues,
2015). The best known groups were the aquatic mesosaurs, lizardlike millerosaurs, procolophonids and large pareiasaurs. Mesozoic is
the time when the species richness started to increase globally as well
as locally with the appearance of new genera and early radiation of

many extant lineages, producing highly diverse terrestrial vertebrates
in the vacant niches created throughout the world due to the endPermian extinction event. Diapsids diversified rapidly by the Middle
Triassic in to many communities of continental tetrapods, whereas
the non-mammalian synapsids became a minor components for the
remainder of the Mesozoic Era. The Gondwana basins of peninsular
India (Fig. 1A) aptly exemplify the diverse vertebrate faunas found
from the Late Palaeozoic and Mesozoic. During the last few decades
much emphasis was given on explorations and excavations of
vertebrate fossils in these basins which have yielded many new fossil
vertebrates, significant both in numbers and diversity of genera, and
providing information on their taphonomy, taxonomy, phylogeny,
evolutionary history, palaeobiology, palaeoecology and palaeobiogeography. There are at least twelve Gondwanan stratigraphic
horizons (Fig. 1B), which have yielded varied vertebrate fossils. In
the current work, we review these vertebrate fossils from two
perspectives. We give a comprehensive account of these fossils, their
occurrences and taxonomy, followed by their global correlation and
biostratigraphic implications. The study highlights several waves of
faunal replacements, especially at the Permian-Triassic and TriassicJurassic boundaries.

Gondwana Basins of India
The Gondwana deposits of India mark the resumption of
sedimentation during the Permo-Carboniferous time after a long gap
since the Proterozoic, and were deposited in glacial, fluvioglacial,
fluviatile and lacustrine conditions. The age of these sediments ranges
from the Late Carboniferous (ca. 290 Ma) to Middle Jurassic, as
separation of the Indian plate from the Gondwana landmass was
initiated during the onset of the Late Jurassic (ca. 167 Ma, Chatterjee
et al., 2017). The Gondwana sediments accumulated in a number of
isolated intracratonic basins of peninsular India bounded by faults
developed along Precambrian lineaments during deposition. The
basins subsided between normal faults, accommodating the Gondwana
successions of 1-4 km in thickness (Veevers and Tewari, 1995). There
are four major intracratonic basins – the Pranhita-Godavari (henceforth
P-G Basin), Satpura, Son-Mahanadi and Damodar (Fig. 1A) – that
document the thick Gondwana Supergroup, which may be subdivided
into a Lower Gondwana Group characterized by the Palaeozoic
March 2020

439

Figure 1 A, Gondwana basins of peninsular India (after Bandyopadhyay, 1999); B, Generalized Gondwana stratigraphy showing the fossilbearing horizons in bold (after Bandyopadhyay and Sengupta, 2006; Mukherjee et al., 2012; Ray 2015); C, Geological map of the PranhitaGodavari Basin (after Kutty et al., 1987; Ray, 1997).
Episodes Vol. 43, no. 1

440
Glossopteris-Gangamopteris flora and an Upper Gondwana Group
dominated by the Mesozoic Dicroidium-Lepidopteris-Ptilophyllum
flora (Cotter and De, 1917; Robinson, 1970; Pascoe, 1975;
Mukhopadhyay et al., 2010). The Lower Gondwana succession in
most of the basins shows uniform lithological features, starting with
the glacio-fluvial Talchir Formation and followed by the coal-bearing
Barakar Formation (Fig. 1B). The Upper Gondwana succession of
these basins, however, differs considerably and the formations are
defined on the basis of distinctive lithology, fossil flora and fauna
(Fig. 1B).
Among the four Gondwana basins of India (Fig. 1A), the
Gondwana succession of the P-G Basin occurs in a narrow, rectilinear
half-graben (400 km long and 75 km wide) trending NNW–SSE (330°150°) and bordered on both sides by the Precambrian rocks
(Fig. 1C). The overall dip of this half-graben basin, which was formed
with the hanging-wall block lying to its west (Biswas, 2003;
Chakraborty et al., 2003), is 5°–12° towards NE (Chakraborty et al.,
2003) and the general palaeocurrent direction is to the north (Sengupta,
1970). Seven vertebrate-bearing horizons have been identified from
this basin, which have yielded highly diverse vertebrate remains
(Bandyopadhyay, 1999). These include the Late Permian Kundaram
Formation, and different Triassic horizons such as the Kamthi,
Yerrapalli, Maleri and Lower Dharmaram formations, and the Jurassic
Upper Dharmaram and Kota formations (Bandyopadhyay, 1999,
2011). The Maleri Formation has two vertebrate assemblages, which
have led to a biochronological subdivision into lower (Carnian) and
upper (Norian) horizons (Kutty and Sengupta 1989).
The westernmost Satpura basin (Fig. 2A) is rhomboidal in outline,
and is about 200 km long and 60 km wide. The longer sides are marked

by the ENE–WSW-trending Son-Narmada (south) and Tapti (north)
faults. This basin is a pull-apart basin and developed due to the
extension related to strike-slip movements along these two faults
(Chakraborty et al., 2003). The regional strike of the basin fill is ENE–
WSW and the regional formation dip is ca. 5° to the north. The
Gondwana succession (ca. 4 km in thickness) consists of siliciclastic
sediments and ranges in age from Early Carboniferous to the Middle
Triassic (Crookshank, 1936; Pascoe, 1975; Robinson, 1970;
Bandyopadhyay and Sengupta, 1999). There are only two vertebratebearing horizons in this basin: the Late Permian Bijori Formation
and the Middle Triassic Denwa Formation (Lydekker, 1885a, b;
Bandyopadhyay and Sengupta, 1999).
In eastern India along the E–W trending Damodar Basin (Fig.
1A), several isolated basins occur, which are of similar morphology
and structural characteristics. These are the Karanpura and Bokaro
basins along with the small outliers of Auranga and Hutar, Jharia
Basin and Raniganj Basin from west to east. The basins are all
rhombic, fault-bound with numerous intrabasinal faults at high angles
to the bounding faults along their longer sides (Chakraborty et al.,
2003). Of these basins, the Raniganj Basin is a fault-controlled
subsidence basin which has produced vertebrate remains. It is
rhomboidal in outline (70 km long and 20 km wide), relatively long
in WNW–ESE direction with low (5°-7°) dip towards south (Fig.
2B). The Damodar Basin has a thick succession (ca. 3 km thick) of
fluvioglacial, fluvial and lacustrine sediments, though vertebrate
fossils are known from only one horizon, the Early Triassic Panchet
Formation (Fig. 1B, 2B).
The Son-Mahanadi, centrally positioned in peninsular India (Fig.
1A), is a composite basin and comprises three sub-basins, namely

Figure 2. Geological maps of A, Satpura Basin (after Sengupta et al., 2016); B, Damodar Basin (after Ray, 2005); C, Rewa Basin (after
Mukherjee et al., 2012).
March 2020

441
the Rewa Basin in the north (Fig. 2C, inset), the centrally-located
Hasdo-Arand Basin, and the Mahanadi Basin in the south. The Rewa
Basin is bounded by the Malwa ridge in the north and by the
Manendragarh-Pratapur ridge in the south (Chakraborty et al., 2003).
The basin is rhomboidal in outline and extends in an essentially ENE–
WSW direction (400 km x 150 km). The overall attitude of the basinfill strata is less than 15° to the north. This basin is considered a
fault-controlled subsidence basin (Chakraborty et al., 2003), and is
characterized by a thick and continuous Triassic succession
(Mukherjee et al., 2012). The Triassic succession is subdivided into
the Pali Formation at the base, followed successively by an arenaceous
Karki Formation and a mud-dominated Tiki Formation (Mukherjee
et al., 2012; Fig. 1B). Of these, the Tiki Formation (Fig. 2C) has
yielded a rich Late Triassic vertebrate fauna (Datta and Das, 1996;
Datta, 2004, 2005; Prasad et al., 2008; Ray et al., 2016; Bhat et al.,
2018a, b; Datta et al., 2019).

Gondwana Vertebrate Faunas
Permian Vertebrate Fauna

given by Bandyopadhyay (1999). Since there has been no update on
the already available information, the faunal details are not repeated
here.
On the other hand, the Kundaram Formation of P-G Basin has
yielded a Late Permian multitaxic tetrapod fauna where the dominant
component is the dicynodonts. The non-dicynodont members include
a small captorhinid reptile (Kutty, 1972) and a medium-sized
gorgonopsian (Ray and Bandyopadhyay, 2003). The dicynodont
assemblage includes two species of the genus Endothiodon (E.
mahalanobisi and E. uniseries), Dicynodontoides (= ‘Kingoria’),
Pristerodon, Oudenodon and Sauroscaptor (Fig.3A–B; Ray, 2000,
2001; Ray and Bandyopadhyay, 2003; Kammerer et al., 2016). The
fauna is mostly represented by complete and partial skulls and lower
jaws, and shows a preponderance of Endothiodon known from about
30 individuals (Ray, 1999; Ray and Bandyopadhyay, 2003). This skullonly accumulation, encrusted with thick iron-rich matrix and collected
from overbank fines, is a lag deposit and has been attributed to
prolonged subaerial exposure prior to burial, resulting in
disarticulation and winnowing out of the postcrania by water flow as
the heavier skulls resisted transportation and were subsequently buried
near the site of death (Ray and Bandyopadhyay, 2003).

Faunal characteristics
Intercontinental relationships
In India, Permian vertebrates have a poor representation and are
known from two distinct horizons, namely the Vihi (Gangamopteris)
beds of the Mamal Formation of Kashmir (Bandyopadhyay, 1999)
and the Kundaram Formation of the P-G Basin (Kutty, 1972; Ray,
1999, 2001). The Kashmir fauna is characterized by several
palaeoniscoid fishes and archegosauroid temnospondyls
(Woodward, 1905; Tripathi, 1962), the details of which were

The Late Permian palaeogeography encompassed three large
continental masses that are principally distributed at the mid-latitudes,
namely the Gondwana, Laurasia and Siberia, joined together to form
the supercontinent Pangaea (Bernardi et al., 2017). Well documented
Late Permian tetrapod ecosystems are known from these landmasses,
where the tetrapod associations were structured and provincialized at

Figure 3. A-B, Sauroscaptor tharavati Kammerer et al. (2016). Skull of a small dicynodont from the Kundaram Formation of India in A,
dorsal and B, ventral views.
Episodes Vol. 43, no. 1

442
high taxonomic levels (Bernardi et al., 2017). Of these, the PermoTriassic Beaufort Group of the Karoo Basin in South Africa documents
a rich tetrapod fossil record, which has resulted in its biostratigraphic
subdivisions (Rubidge, 1995; Smith et al., 2012) with global
applicability. Of the six Assemblage Zones (AZ) Pristerodon and
Endothiodon appeared first in the Pristerognathus AZ, proliferated
in the Tropidostoma AZ and persisted as a rare member in the
Cistecephalus AZ (Rubidge, 1995). In addition, the Pristerognathus
AZ contains the small dicynodont Diictodon, which constitutes about
85% of the total fossils found. It decreases to about 40% in the
Tropidostoma AZ (Rubidge, 1995), where Rhachiocephalus and
Endothiodon (E. miseries, E. bathystoma) constitute 10–30% and
5%, respectively. Similarly, the fossil fauna of the Cistecephalus AZ
is composed of Diictodon (50%) followed by Oudenodon (20%),
Cistecephalus (10%), Pristerodon (5%), Emydops (5%),
Aulacephalodon (5%), Rhachiocephalus and Endothiodon (less than
2%, Rubidge, 1995).
There are several other Endothiodon-bearing horizons in Africa,
which are analogous to the Karoo environment and are found in
Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Malawi, Zambia and Tanzania (King, 1992).
In Zambia, the Lopingian is represented by the Upper Madumabisa
Mudstone Formation in the Luangwa Basin, from which a single
assemblage of 14 dicynodont taxa is known and correlated with the
Cistecephalus AZ of South Africa (King, 1992; Angielcyzk et al.,
2014; Sidor et al., 2014). The Late Permian tetrapod fossils are
preserved in the Ruhuhu and Usili formations of the Ruhuhu Basin
of Tanzania, where the tetrapods occur at multiple stratigraphic
horizons in each formation (Angielczyk et al., 2014). The Usili
horizons and the uppermost Ruhuhu horizon contain a single faunal
assemblage dominated by dicynodonts consisting of endothiodonts,
emydopoids, cryptodonts, and dicynodontoids (52%), followed by
gorgonopsians, therocephalians, cynodonts and notably abundant
biarmosuchians (35%), pareiasaurs (5.5%) and temnospondyls
(6.6%). Bernardi et al. (2017) suggested that these horizons may be
correlated with the upper Cistecephalus and/or lower Daptocephalus
AZs of the Karoo Basin.
Endothiodon is also known from the K5 horizon of the Metangula

Graben, Mozambique along with an endemic kingoriid dicynodont
Niassodon and a probable Oudenodon (Castanhinha et al., 2013).
Based on the presence of Endothiodon and Oudenodon, the latter
making its first appearance in the Tropidostoma AZ of South Africa,
K5 is correlated broadly with the Tropidostoma and Cistecephalus
AZs (Castanhinha et al., 2013). In addition, Endothiodon-bearing
strata are also known from the Chiweta beds of Malawi (Frobisch,
2009; Bernardi et al., 2017). The Lower Sakamena Formation of
Madagascar is known for its richness in the Late Permian fossils,
which are characterized by the diapsids (Smith, 2000). Mazin and
King (1991) described a dicynodont taxon, Oudenodon sakamenenis
from the upper part of Lower Sakamena Formation. Though longranging, this genus is common in the Cistecephalus and Dicynodon
AZs of South Africa suggesting a probable correlation.
Apart from Africa and India, a rich Late Permian fauna is known
from the Rio do Rasto Formation of the Paraná Basin, Brazil (Cisneros
and Abdala, 2005; Benardi et al., 2017). The Rio do Rasto Formation
of the Paraná Basin has produced three local faunas containing
vertebrates– the Aceguá, Posto Queimado and Serra do Cadeado
(Barberena et al., 1991). Of these, the Serra do Cadeado local fauna
consists of Endothiodon (Barberena et al., 1975) and long-snouted
rhinesuchids, including Australerpeton cosgriffi, suggesting that the
Serra do Cadeado fauna can be loosely correlated with
Pristerognathus, Tropidostoma and Cistecephalus AZs.
A close similarity of the Kundaram vertebrate fauna with that of
the Tropidostoma and/or Cistecephalus (AZ) was noted based on their
dicynodont-content (Ray, 1999). Subsequent works by several authors
have shown that Endothiodon dominates in the Kundaram fauna; the
latter containing the long-ranging Pristerodon, Oudenodon and a
cistecephalid Sauroscaptor (Ray, 2001; Kammerer et al., 2016), with
a gorgonopsian (Ray and Bandyopadhyay, 2003) and a captorhinid
(Kutty, 1972). Based on this dicynodont-rich fossil content, the
Kundaram Formation may be correlated with the Tropidostoma and
lower Cistecephalus AZs of South Africa, and several other
Endothiodon-bearing African strata (Fig. 4). These include the upper
Madumabisa Mudstones of Zambia, Ruhuhu and Kawinga formations
of Tanzania, K5 horizon of Mozambique, Chiweta Bed of Malawi. In

Figure 4. Correlation of the Upper Permian vertebrate-bearing horizons around the world (shaded in grey). Middle-Upper Permian time
scale follows Gradstein et al. (2012). Abbreviation: Chnx, Changhsingian; Sources of information: Rubidge (1995), Ray (1999), Cisneros
and Abdala (2005), Smith et al. (2012), Bernardi et al. (2017).
March 2020

443
addition, the Kundaram Formation may be correlated with the Lower
Sakamena Formation of Madagascar and the Morro Pelado member
of the Rio do Rasto Formation of Brazil. Hence, an early Lopingian
(Wuchiapingian) age is suggested for the Kundaram vertebrate fauna.

Triassic Vertebrate Faunas
The largest and most devastating mass extinction event took place
at the end of the Permian period when 70% of marine genera and 70–
80% of the terrestrial families became extinct (Dineen et al., 2014).
The Triassic period (252.2-201.3 my; Gradstein et al., 2012) is
characterized by extraordinary changes in terms of vegetation due to
different climatic conditions, two major extinction events and
advancement in vertebrate evolution (Sues and Fraser, 2010). The
typical hot and arid climate of the Late Permian continued at the
beginning of the Triassic but gradually the period witnessed fairly
moist and hot climate of monsoon type with an alternation of wet and
dry seasons (Robinson, 1970; Preto et al., 2010; Sues and Fraser,
2010). The long 50 million year Triassic period started with
impoverished terrestrial vertebrate diversity when the competition
for niche space was low because of low beta-diversity which gradually
increased with subsequent origination, speciation and interaction
between species resulting in diversification (Hoffmann et al., 2013;
Hautmann, 2014). The geologically ephemeral Early Triassic fauna
was replaced by a novel Middle Triassic community with renewed
incumbency (Roopnarine, 2018) but low level of cosmopolitanism
(Sahney and Benton, 2008). The period ended with a highly diverse
vertebrate fauna that included varied temnospondyls, lepidosaurs,
crocodilians, non-avian dinosaurs and early mammals, thus restoring
the terrestrial tetrapod community and setting the stage for the modern
terrestrial ecosystem (Fraser, 2006; Sues and Fraser, 2010). The Late
Triassic thus may be considered as a transitional period between
ancient and modern terrestrial ecosystems.
Three general continental tetrapod faunas dominated the Triassic.
These faunas comprised the ‘Palaeozoic holdovers’, which was the
Early Triassic tetrapod assemblage that survived the end-Permian
extinction to proliferate during the Triassic, the ‘indigenous’ Triassic
fauna, which appeared and became extinct during the Late Triassic,
and the ‘living’ fauna, which appeared during the Late Triassic and
are still continuing today. This latter group consists of the dinosaurs
(including birds), crocodylians, turtles, lepidosaurs and several extant
groups of amphibians (Romer, 1966; Padian and Sues, 2015).
Representative fossils of these groups are found in the Indian scenario,
the details of which are discussed in the following section.

lapillopsid Manubrantlia, a plagiosaurid Capulomala, a brachyopid
Pachygonia, a probable tupilakosaurid Tupilakosaurus sp., and an
indeterminate benthosuchid (Bandyopadhyay, 1999, 2011; Warren et
al., 2009; D. P. Sengupta, pers comm.). The Panchet fauna also
includes possibly three species of the dicynodont, Lystrosaurus
(Tripathi and Satsangi, 1963; Ray, 2005; Gupta and Das, 2011), two
cynodonts, Thrinxodon and Panchetocynodon (Satsangi, 1987; Das
and Gupta, 2012) and the diapsid Proterosuchus (Huxley, 1865;
Bandyopadhyay, 1999, 2011; Table 1).
The other Early Triassic vertebrate-bearing horizon is the Kamthi
Formation of the P–G Basin. This formation has purple siltstone and
ferruginous sandstones, which are pebbly in places. The Kamthi
siltstone has yielded numerous small, articulated but poorly preserved,
skeletons (Fig. 5A–B), which were identified as a dicynodont
(Bandyopadhyay and Sengupta, 2006). Although the skulls are mostly
broken or distorted, these are large with flaring posterior ends,
especially the squamosals. The postcranial skeletons are, in
comparison well preserved and articulated. The Kamthi dicynodont
is characterized by a robust humerus with expanded ends, which is
smaller than the associated femur, and the presence of two U-shaped
deep notches on the dorsal margin of the iliac blade (Fig. 5B). Such
notched iliac border resulting in three possible origination sites for
the ilio-femoralis muscle is seen only in the dicynodont Lystrosaurus
(Ray, 2006). Presence of this unique feature suggests that the Kamthi
dicynodont was Lystrosaurus, though other vertebrate fossils are yet

Early Triassic
There are two Early Triassic horizons bearing representative
vertebrate fossils in India. These include the Panchet Formation of
the Damodar basin and the Kamthi Formation of the P-G Basin
(Fig. 1B). Of these, the Panchet Formation (Fig. 2B), comprising
essentially siliciclastic sediments, has yielded various vertebrate
remains in the sandstone and shale. The ichthyofaunal assemblage
includes numerous scales, teeth and tooth plates of actinopterygians,
dipnoans and chondrichthyans suggesting lack of endemism (Gupta,
2009). This formation also includes several temnospondyls,
dicynodonts, diapsids and cynodonts (Table 1). The temnospondyls
are represented by the trematosaurids Indolyrocephalus, Gonioglyptus,
a rhytidosteid Indobrachyops, a lydekkerinid, Lydekkerina, a
Episodes Vol. 43, no. 1

Figure 5A-B, Lystrosaurus sp. Articulated skeletons found on the
purple siltstone of the Kamthi Formation.

444
Table 1. Lower and Middle Triassic vertebrate faunas of India. Sources of information: Tripathi and Satsangi (1963), Bandyopadhyay (2011), Ray (2005),
Bandyopadhyay and Sengupta (2006), Gupta and Das (2011), Das and Gupta (2012), Sengupta et al. (2017), D. P. Sengupta pers.comm. (2018)
Panchet

Yerrapalli

Denwa

Acrolepidae

Indeterminate genus

-

-

PISCES
Perleididae

Indeterminate genus

-

Chondrichthyes

Indeterminate genus

-

-

Ceratodontidae

Indeterminate genus

Ceratodus sp.

Ceratodus sp.

Saurichthyformes

-

Saurichthys sp.

Rhytidosteidae

Indobrachyops panchetensis

-

-

Trematosauridae

Indolyrocephalus huxleyi

-

Lonchorhynchine indet.

-

-

AMPHIBIA

Gonioglyptus fragilis
Gonioglyptus longirostris
Lapillopsidae

Manubrantlia khaki

Lydekkerinidae

Lydekkerina huxleyi

Plagiosauridae

Capulomala panchetensis

-

Brachyopidae

?Pachygonia incurvata

-

Undescribed

Benthosuchidae

?benthosuchid

-

-

Tupilakosauridae

Tupilakosaurus sp.

-

-

Mastodonosauridae

-

Parotosuchus rajareddyi

-

Capitosauroidea

-

-

Paracyclotosaurus
crookshanki
Cherninia denwai

Proterosuchidae

Proterosuchus
(Chasmatosaurus,
Ankistrodon) indicus

-

-

Rhynchosauridae

-

Mesodapedon kuttyi

Undescribed

Allokotosauria

-

Pamelaria dolichotrachlea

Shringasaurus indicus

Erythrosuchidae

-

Erythrosuchus sp.

Aphanosauria

-

Yarasuchus deccanensis

-

Lystrosaurus murrayi
L. cf. declivis, L. cf. curvatus

-

-

DIAPSIDA

SYNAPSIDA
Lystrosauridae
Kannemeyeriiform

-

Wadiasaurus indicus

Undescribed taxa

Stahleckeriidae

-

Rechnisaurus cristarhynchus

-

Thrinaxodontidae

Thrinaxodon bengalensis

-

-

Brasilodontidae

Panchetocynodon
damodarensis

-

-

-

Trirachodontidae indet.

-

Trirachodontidae

to be recovered from the formation. In addition, the temnospondyl
Brachyops laticeps is known from the upper part of the Kamthi
Formation or the ‘Mangli” beds’ (Owen, 1855).

Middle Triassic
The Yerrapalli Formation of the P-G Basin and the Denwa
Formation of the Satpura Basin (Figs 1B–C, 2A) are the major Middle
Triassic vertebrate-bearing horizons of India (Crookshank, 1936; Jain
et al., 1964), though fragmentary remains of a dicynodont and
temnospondyl are known from the Bhimaram Formation (Kutty et
al., 1987). The strata of the Yerrapalli Formation comprise red to

violet mudstone alternating with quartzose sandstone, with mudstone
being fossil-rich. The vertebrate assemblage (Table 1) consists of the
ceratodontid Ceratodus, the saurichthyform Saurichthys, the
capitosaur Parotosuchus, the stenaulorhynchine rhynchosaur
Mesodapedon, the allokotosaur Pamelaria, the erythrosuchid
Erythrosuchus, the aphanosaur Yarasuchus, two kannemeyeriiform
dicynodonts (Wadiasaurus and Rechnisaurus), and a trirachodontid.
The Denwa Formation of the Satpura Basin is the other wellknown Middle Triassic vertebrate-bearing horizon of India. On the
basis of lithology, Maulik et al. (2000) divided the formation into
lower and upper parts. The lower Denwa comprises multistoried,
sheet-like medium-fine grained sandstone bodies interleaved with red
March 2020

445
mudstones, while the upper Denwa is a mudstone-dominated unit
characterized by layers of ribbon-shaped channel-fill bodies and sandy
to heterolithic sheet sandstones encased within the mudstones. The
vertebrate assemblage (Table 1) includes the ceratodontid Ceratodus,
the capitosaurs Paracyclotosaurus, Cherninia, and three indeterminate
taxa, the undescribed brachyopid, the lonchorhynchine trematosaurid,
an undescribed rhynchosaur, and various medium–large dicynodonts
(Mukherjee and Sengupta, 1998; Bandyopadhyay and Sengupta,
1999; Mukherjee et al., 2019). Recently the horned allokotosaur
Shringasaurus (Fig. 6A–B) has been described from this horizon
(Sengupta et al., 2017). This is the only known horned Triassic reptile
to date.

Late Triassic
Three Late Triassic horizons of India contain distinct vertebrate
assemblages — the Maleri and the lower Dharmaram formations of
the P-G Basin (Table 2) and the Tiki Formation of the Rewa Basin
(Table 3). The Maleri Formation is represented by a mudstonedominated, nearly 400-m-thick fluvial succession deposited under a
semi-arid climate (Sarkar, 1988) and may be subdivided into two
parts. The lower part (100–150 m thick) comprises vertically stacked
siltstone-dominated intervals, whereas the upper part (200–300 m
thick) contains multistoried, sheet sandstone, vertically separated by
comparatively thicker siltstone-dominated intervals (Dasgupta and
Ghosh, 2018). Numerous thin, sheet-like and lensoid bodies of crossbedded grainstones occur at different stratigraphic levels (Dasgupta
et al., 2017).
This formation has yielded two distinct vertebrate assemblages

(Kutty and Sengupta, 1989; Prasad et al., 2008; Bandyopadhyay, 2011;
Chakravorti and Sengupta, 2019). The Maleri Formation encompasses
12 families, which represent 25 genera and species (Table 2), of which
12 and 13 taxa belonged to the lower and upper Maleri faunas,
respectively. The lower Maleri fauna is characterized by an association
of the phytosaur Parasuchus, the rhynchosaur Hyperodapedon and
the metoposaurid Panthasaurus (Chatterjee, 1974, 1978;
RoyChowdhury, 1965; Chakravorti and Sengupta, 2019). Other
vertebrates comprise a ptychoceratodontid, a xenacanthid, a
prolacertid (?), a yet to be described phytosaur similar to
Angistorhinus, an aetosaur similar to Typothorax, an allokotosaur, a
basal saurischian, and two cynodont genera (Bandyopadhyay, 2011;
Novas et al., 2011; Nesbitt et al., 2017; Table 2).
The upper Maleri fauna, on the other hand, includes two
chigutisaurids, Kuttycephalus and Compsocerops (Kutty and
Sengupta, 1989), two derived phytosaurs similar to Angistorhinus
and Leptosuchus (Hungerbühler et al., 2002), two dinosauromorphs
(Novas et al., 2011), and a dicynodont very similar to Stahleckeria
(Novas et al 2011; Bandyopadhyay, 2011; Table 2). This faunal
assemblage occurs in a stratigraphically younger horizon, from which
Panthasaurus, Hyperodapedon, Parasuchus and Exaeretodon had
disappeared, suggesting that the latter is younger than the lower Maleri
fauna (Kutty and Sengupta, 1989).
The Maleri Formation is overlain by the Dharmaram Formation,
one of the most important stratigraphic horizons, and encompasses
the Triassic-Jurassic boundary in the Indian Gondwana
(Bandyopadhyay and RoyChowdhury, 1996). It has been
biochronologically divided into a lower part bearing a Rhaetian fauna
and an upper part yielding a Hettangian fauna (Bandyopadhyay and

Figure 6. A-B, Shringasaurus indicus Sengupta et al. (2017). A horned allokotosaur from the Denwa Formation of India as A, reconstructed
skeleton; B, restored life form. Missing bones are shaded by grey.
Episodes Vol. 43, no. 1

446
Table 2. Late Triassic vertebrates from different stratigraphic horizons of the P-G Basin, India. Sources of information: Kutty and Sengupta (1989),
Bandyopadhyay (1999, 2011), Prasad et al. (2008), Chakravorti and Sengupta (2019)
Lower Maleri

Upper Maleri

Lower Dharmaram

Ceratodontidae

Ptychoceratodus virapa

-

-

-

P. nageswari

P. nageswari

Polyacrodontidae

Polyacrodus? contrarius

-

-

Xenacanthidae

Mooreodontus indicus

M. indicus

M. indicus

Metoposauridae

Panthasaurus maleriensis

-

-

Chigutisauridae

-

Compsocerops cosgriffi

-

-

Kuttycephalus triangularis

-

Phytosauria

Parasuchus hislopi
Angistorhinus

cf. Leptosuchus
Angistorhinus

Nicrosaurus-like form
-

Rhynchosauria

Hyperodapedon huxleyi

-

-

Prolacertiformes

Malerisaurus robinsonae

-

-

Aetosauria

cf. Typothorax

Aetosauria indet.

Paratypothorax-like form

-

-

Desmatosuchus-like form

Alwalkeria maleriensis

Gen indet. A (ISI R282)
Gen indet. A (284)
Nambalia roychowdhurii
Jaklapallisaurus asymmetrica
Guibasauridae indet.

J. asymmetrica
Sauropodomorpha indet.
Neotheropoda indet.

Dicynodontia

-

cf. Ischigualastia

-

Cynodontia

Exaeretodon statisticae
Deccanodon maleriensis

-

-

PISCES

AMPHIBIA

DIAPSIDA

Dinosauriformes

SYNAPSIDA

RoyChowdhury, 1996, Bandyopadhyay, 2016). This formation is a
sandstone-dominated unit that contains subordinate amount of
mudstone. The Rhaetian faunal assemblage contains 8 taxa (Table
2), comprising a ptychoceratodontid, a xenacanthid (Nath and
Yadagiri, 2007; Prasad et al., 2008), a derived phytosaur similar to
Nicrosaurus, an aetosaurid similar to Paratypothorax (Kutty et al
2007; Bandyopadhyay, 2011), several sauropodomorphs, and a
neotheropod (Novas et al., 2011).
Another Late Triassic Gondwana horizon that is rich in varied
vertebrate fossils is the Tiki Formation of the Rewa Basin (Fig. 7AP). It has yielded a diverse fish assemblage comprising hybodontid
and xenacanthid sharks, dipnoans and actinopterygians (Prasad et
al., 2008; Ray et al., 2016; Bhat and Ray, 2018; Bhat et al., 2018a, b)
a metoposaurid, Panthasaurus maleriensis (Sengupta, 2002;
Chakravorti and Sengupta, 2019), various diapsids including the
rauisuchid Tikisuchus romeri and the rhynchosaur Hyperodapedon
tikiensis (Chatterjee and Mazumdar, 1987; Mukherjee and Ray, 2014).
Numerous archosauriform teeth belonging to 12 distinct morphotypes
have been reported from the Tiki Formation (Ray et al., 2019). These
include Galtonia, Protecovasaurus, aetosaur, indeterminate
archosauriforms and theropod-like forms. Recently Datta et al. (2019a)
reported numerous isolated teeth of a possible leptosuchomorph-grade
phytosaur. Moreover, review of the skull earlier identified as
Parasuchus from the Tiki Formation (Chatterjee 1978) is found to
have belonged to a a new mystriosuchine phytosaur Volcanosuchus
statisticae (Datta et al. 2019b). The formation has also yielded

fragmentary remains of a saurischian dinosaur (Ray et al., 2016) and
small theropod-like ungual phalanges (Rakshit et al., 2018). It may
be noted that putatively the earliest lizard Tikiguania estesi (Datta
and Ray, 2006) was reported from this formation. However,
Hutchinson et al. (2012) questioned the provenance and geologic
horizon of Tikiguania because it is almost indistinguishable from
living agamids and suggested that the fossil might have come from
younger horizons. As Tikiguania was extracted from the Tiki
mudstones, which have yielded a rich microvertebrate fauna (Bhat,
2018; Bhat et al., 2018a, b; Bhat and Ray, 2018; Rakshit et al., 2018;
Ray et al., 2019), such contamination hypothesis seems less likely
(Chatterjee et al., 2017). However, unless more conclusive evidence
is available, the taxon is excluded from the Tiki faunal list (Table 3).
The formation has also yielded various non-mammalian cynodonts
including a large traversodontid Ruberodon roychowdhurii (Ray,
2015), a small non-mammalian cynodont Rewaconodon tikiensis
(Datta et al., 2004), a morganucodontid mammal Gondwanadon
tapani (Datta and Das, 1996) and, one of the earliest ‘nontherian’
mammals Tiktherium, which is characterized by transversely expanded
molar (Datta, 2005).

Triassic Intercontinental Relationships
Early Triassic Global Correlation
The Panchet fauna virtually duplicates the Early Triassic faunas
March 2020

447

Figure 7. Vertebrates from the Late Triassic Tiki Formation of India. A-B, scattered fossils in the field; C-D, Hyperdapedon tikiensis
Mukherjee and Ray (2014). Maxillary dental batteries in ventral views; E, Volcanosuchus statisticae Datta et al. (2019b). A partial skull in
anterior view; F, Tikisuchus romeri Chatterjee and Mazumdar (1987). Restored skull and lower jaw; G-P, isolated teeth of G, Ptychoceratodus
oldhami Bhat and Ray (2018) in ventral view; H-I, Pristrisodus tikiensis Bhat et al. (2018a) in H, labial and I, lingual views; J-O, xenacanthid,
J-L, Xenacanthus jaini and M-O, Xenacanthus indicus (Bhat et al., 2018b) in labial, lingual and side views; P, an archosauriform tooth in
labial view (Bhat, 2018).

of South Africa, Antarctica, Russia and China, showing similar faunal
associations, and suggesting a Pangaean vertebrate assemblage
(Bandyopadhyay, 2011). Although the earliest Lystrosaurus (L.
maccaigi) is known from the latest Permian Dicynodon AZ (Smith
and Ward, 2001), typical Lystrosaurus species including L. murrayi
and L. curvatus appeared in the earliest Triassic Lystrosaurus AZ
Episodes Vol. 43, no. 1

(Smith et al., 2012) and hence may be correlated with the Panchet
Formation. In addition, the Panchet fauna may be correlated with
other Lystrosaurus-bearing horizons such as the Kamthi Formation
of the P-G Basin, the N’tawere Formation of Zambia and the Lower
Fremouw Formation of Antarctica (Fig. 8).
The Lystrosaurus - Thrinaxodon - Proterosuchus association is

448
Table 3. Vertebrate fossil assemblage of the Late Triassic Tiki Formation of the Rewa Gondwana Basin, India. Sources of information: Datta and Das
(1996), Datta (2004), Mukherjee and Ray (2014), Ray et al. (2016, 2019), Bhat and Ray (2018), Bhat et al. (2018a, b), Rakshit et al. (2018), Datta et al.
(2019a, b).
Order/Family

Genus and species

CHONDRICHTHYIS
Lonchididae

Order/Family
DIAPSIDA

Lonchidion estesi

Phytosauria

Lonchidion incumbens
Xenacanthidae

(?)leptosuchomorph
Rhynchosauria

Hyperodapedon tikiensis

Mooreodontus indicus

Rauisuchidae

Tikisuchus romeri

Mooreodontus jaini

Rhynchocephalia

Undescribed

Tikiodontus asymmetricus

Archosauriformes

Galtonia sp., Protecovasaurus
sp., other indeterminate forms

Dinosauriformes
Ceratodus sp.

Undescribed
Theropod-like(?) forms

Ptychoceratodus oldhami

Aetosauria

Gnathorhizidae

Gnathorhiza sp.

SYNAPSIDA

Actinopterygii

Undescribed

Cynodontia

Panthasaurus maleriensis

Mammaliaformes

AMPHIBIA
Metoposauridae

Volcanosuchus statisticae

Pristrisodus tikiensis

OSTEICHTHYIS
Ptychocerato-dontidae

Genus and species

Undescribed
Ruberodon roychowdhurii
Rewaconodon tikiensis

well known from the Lystrosaurus AZ of the Beaufort Group of South
Africa and the Fremouw Formation of Antarctica (Kitching et al.,
1972; Colbert and Kitching, 1977). However, the temnospondyl fauna
of the Panchet Formation is more diverse as well as cosmopolitan.
There are six or seven temnospondyl families in contrast to only two
or three species of Lystrosaurus, a species of Proterosuchus, and two
cynodont taxa although the abundance of Lystrosaurus far exceeds
that of the other taxa. Based on these tetrapods, the Panchet fauna
may be correlated with the Arcadia Formation of Australia, Knocklofty
Formation of Tasmania, the Wordie Creek Formation of East
Greenland, the Wupatki and Torrey members of the Moenkopi
Formation of USA, and the Puesto Viejo and Rio Mendoza formations
of Argentina. The age of the Panchet Formation is considered as Early
Triassic (Induan-Early Olenekian; Cosgriff, 1984; Ray, 2005, 2015).
The abundance of small Lystrosaurus specimens from the Kamthi
Formation points towards correlation with the Lystrosaurus AZ of
the Beaufort Group of South Africa, suggesting that the Kamthi
Formation may be considered as Early Triassic in age. The specific
identification of these Lystrosaurus specimens is not possible because
of their fragmentary condition. A distinct time gap is envisaged
between the Early Triassic Kamthi Formation and the underlying
Kundaram Formation, which is Late Permian (early Lopingian,
Wuchiapingian) in age (Fig. 1B).

Middle Triassic Global Correlation
With the beginning of the Triassic period, Lystrosaurus, became
the most common tetrapod immediately after the end-Permian
extinction event, and rapid turnover gave way to the archosauromorphs
(Sahney and Benton, 2008). In the Pangaean scenario, the diversity
of the once dominant temnospondyls and herbivorous synapsids
started to decline at the beginning of the Middle Triassic and
simultaneously the diapsids continued to flourish. However, the
Middle Triassic continental vertebrates are comparatively less well
represented because of the worldwide increase in marine conditions,

Tikitherium copei
Gondwanadon tapani

especially in Laurasia (Gandin et al., 1982; Hallam, 1992). In terms
of climate the Middle Triassic period was fairly hot and moist with
alternate wet monsoon and dry seasons (Robinson, 1973; Tucker and
Benton, 1982; Preto et al., 2010). Temnospondyl amphibians are the
most common vertebrate fossils in many Middle Triassic assemblages
and diverse archosauromorphs as well as archosaurs also started to
flourish. The important Middle Triassic vertebrate horizons of Laurasia
include the Holbrook and the Anton Chico members (Anisian) of the
Moenkopi Formation in USA (Schoch et al., 2010), much of the
Buntsandstein in Central Europe (Gradstein et al., 2012), the Dongus
and Bukobay formations of Russia (Sennikov, 1996), GrenzbitumenZone of Switzerland (Röhl et al., 2001), the Otter Sandstone and the
Bromsgrove Sandstone formations of United Kingdom (Milner et
al., 1990), the Er-ma-ying Formation of Shanxi and Inner Mongolia
(Zhang et al., 2003; Sues and Fraser, 2010; Sookias et al., 2014), and
the Karamay Formation of Xinjiang, China (He et al., 2014). The
most important Middle Triassic vertebrate yielding horizon in
Gondwana is the Manda Formation of Tanzania (Cox, 1991; Lucas,
1998); it has produced a large number of Middle Triassic vertebrates.
The other horizons are the Omingonde Formation of Namibia (Keyser,
1973; Pickford, 1995; Abdala and Smith, 2009), the N’tawere
Formation of Zambia (Catuneanu et al., 2005; Rubidge, 2015), the
Arcadia Formation, and the Hawkesbury and Wianamatta formations
of Australia (Banks, 1978; Warren, 2012).
Jain et al. (1964) considered the age of Yerrapalli Formation as
late Early Triassic or possibly early Middle Triassic. Later, with the
recovery of the kannemeyeriid dicynodont (Roy Chowdhury, 1970;
Bandyopadhyay, 1988a), and the stenaulorhynchine rhynchosaur
(Chatterjee 1980), the formation was correlated with the Manda
Formation of Tanzania, N’tawere Formation of Zambia, the Donguz
Series of Russia, and the Omingonde Formation of Namibia, and an
Anisian age for the Yerrapalli Formation was suggested by
Bandyopadhyay (1988b) and Bandyopadhyay and Sengupta (1999,
2006). The other fossil-bearing Middle Triassic horizon of India, the
Denwa Formation of the Satpura Basin, has not yielded any nonMarch 2020

Figure 8. Global correlation of the Triassic Gondwana horizons of India. Triassic time scale is after Ogg et al. (2016). Sources of information: Cosgriff (1984), Rubidge (1995), Bandyopadhyay
and Sengupta (1999, 2006), Schoch et al. (2010), Ray (2015), Martz and Parker (2017), Datta et al. (2019b).

449

Episodes Vol. 43, no. 1

450
mammalian cynodonts. Bandyopadhyay and Sengupta (1999)
correlated it with the Holbrook Member of the Moenkopi Formation,
U.S.A (Fig. 8). However, Abdala et al. (2005) directly correlated
subzone C of the Cynognathus AZ of South Africa with the Denwa
Formation based on the presence of Paracyclotosaurus, and
considered the possible extension of the age to the latest Anisian
based on the presence of two mastodonsaurids. Recently, a new
capitosaurid temnospondyl, Antarctosuchus, a sister taxon to the
Indian form Paracyclotosaurus crookshanki, has been described from
the upper Fremouw Formation of Antarctica (Sidor et al., 2014). Based
on this fossil fauna, the age of the Denwa Formation is considered as
Anisian (Bandyopadhyay and Sengupta, 1999; Sengupta et al., 2016,
2017).

Late Triassic Global Correlation
The faunal records of Late Triassic horizons of the world are
comparatively rich and complete. A variety of diapsids, including
dinosaurs, emerged during this time and diversified throughout the
world. Simultaneously temnospondyls and several amniotes faced
extinction. A number of major tetrapod taxa such as metoposaurids,
phytosaurs, aetosaurs, rauisuchids, poposaurids, trilophosaurs,
diademodontids, traversodonts, chiniquodontids appeared in the Late
Triassic, became the indigenous taxa of this time and disappeared by
the end of the Triassic. Almost all the major group of extant terrestrial
tetrapods, such as dinosaurs (including birds), pterosaurs,
crocodylians, turtles, lepidosaurs, extant amphibians (frogs,
salamanders and caecilians) evolved by the end of Triassic. The first
mammaliaforms (Rowe, 1988) appeared during the Late Triassic. The
appearance of dinosaurs and mammaliaforms near its close makes
the Triassic a transitional period between the archaic tetrapods of the
Palaeozoic, the rise and fall of the dinosaurs during the Mesozoic
and the spectacular radiation of mammaliaforms during the
Cenozoic.
In terms of climate the Late Triassic period had fairly moist and
hot climate of monsoon type with an alternation of wet and dry seasons
(Robinson, 1970; Preto et al., 2010). A significant episode of increased
rainfall throughout the world took place during this time, especially
at the boundary between the lower and upper Carnian (Preto et al.,
2010). Subsequently, the late Carnian and Norian became climatically
stable with some minor climatic changes. In Laurasia, a large number
of Late Triassic faunas is known from the Chinle Formation of
southwestern United States, Dockum Formation of Texas, Popo Agie
Formation of Wyoming and Newark Group of eastern United States
(Long and Murry, 1995; Heckert, 2004; Lucas, 2018), Keuper Group
of Germany (Deutsche Stratigraphische Kommission, 2005; Gradstein
et al., 2012), and Krasiejów and Lisowice of Poland (Dzik and Sulej,
2007; Dzik et al., 2008). Among the Gondwana continents the Late
Triassic vertebrates are known from the Ischigualasto, Los Colorado
and Cacheuta formations of Argentina (Bonaparte, 1978; Tucker and
Benton, 1982; Rogers et al., 1993; Arcucci et al., 2004), Santa Maria
and Caturrita formations of Brazil (Langer, 2007; Langer et al., 2018),
Lower Elliot Formation of South Africa (Yates, 2003), Isalo II Beds
of Madagascar (Flynn et al., 1999; Fortuny et al., 2019) and Argana
Group of Morocco (Dutuit, 1972; Buffa et al., 2019).
In the current work, the post-Carnian age for the Chinle Formation
in Arizona and New Mexico are considered based on radioisotopic
data (Irmis et al., 2010, 2011; Olsen et al., 2011; Martz et al., 2013),
where Otischalkian and Adamanian are early Lacian (early Early

Norian) and late Lacian (late Early Norian), respectively (Martz and
Parker, 2017). Moreover, the Carnian-Norian boundary falls at about
228 Ma, and the duration of the Norian stage was long and comprises
c.20 Ma (Gradstein et al., 2012; Ogg et al., 2016). Proliferation of
Hyperodapedon in the lower Maleri fauna (about 60% of the total
diversity, Benton, 1983) shows that it belongs to the Hyperodapedon
biochron (sensu Lucas and Heckert, 2002) and the Ischigualastian
LVF (sensu Langer, 2005), and a Carnian age was suggested for the
formation (Langer, 2005). The lower Ischigualasto Formation of
Argentina where Hyperodapedon dominated has been dated at
231.4±0.3 Ma (Martínez et al., 2011), i.e., late Carnian (Gradstein et
al., 2012; Schultz et al., 2016). Langer et al. (2017) hence suggested
a late Carnian to earliest Norian age for the horizons where
Hyperodapedon is abundant, including the lower Maleri Formation.
Although the lower Maleri Formation has yielded aetosaurian remains
(Bandyopadhyay, 2011) these are yet to be studied in details. On the
other hand, the metoposaurid temnopondyls are not robust Late
Triassic biomarkers (Martz and Parker, 2017) as these have a long
range extending from middle/late Carnian to middle/late Norian.
Moreover, their global distribution is genera-specific as Koskinonodon
and Apachesaurus are known from Noth America, Metoposaurus is
from Europe, Arganasaurus and Dutuitosaurus is from Morocco and
Panthasaurus from India (Chakravorti and Sengupta, 2019; Bufa et
al., 2019). However, presence of Exaeretodon (Chatterjee, 1982)
suggests a Late Carnian age for the lower Maleri Formation as this
genus is essentially known from the late Carnian Hyperodapedon AZ
of Santa Maria Formation of Brazil (Langer et al., 2007), and the
Ischigualasto Formation of Argentina (Abdala and Ribeiro, 2010). In
addition, the lower Maleri Formation is correlated with the Isalo II
Beds (Madagascar), the Lossiemouth Sandstone (England), and the
Middle Keuper (Germany, Fig. 8).
It is to be noted that the Bhimaram Formation, underlying the
Maleri Formation is poorly fossiliferous and has yielded fragmentary
remains of temnospondyl amphibians and dicynodonts (Kutty et al.,
1987). Bandyopadhyay and Sengupta (2006) assigned an age of
Middle Triassic (late Anisian to Ladinian) to the formation. Hence, a
distinct age gap is evident between the Bhimaram Formation and the
overlying lower Maleri Formation.
The upper Maleri Formation has yielded a diverse assemblage,
including different sauropodomorphs. This distinctly younger upper
Maleri fauna may be correlated with the Lower Elliot Formation of
South Africa, lower part of the upper Mackay Formation of
Madagascar, and lower parts of the Rio Blanco and Los Colorados
Formation, Argentina (Fig. 8). An early Norian age has been proposed
for this upper Maleri fauna (Bandyopadhyay, 2011). Although an age
gap was suggested between the lower and upper fauna of the Maleri
Formation (Langer, 2005), later workers (Bandyopadhyay and
Sengupta, 2006; Bandyopadhyay, 2011) did not support this view
(Ray, 2015).
The fossil assemblage of the lower Dharmaram Formation is
essentially an archosaur-dominated tetrapod fauna, which is distinctly
different from that of the underlying upper Maleri Formation. The
lower Dharmaram fauna resembles post-Ischigualastian assemblages,
such as that of the La Esquina Fauna of the Los Colorados Formation,
the Trossingen Formation of the German Keuper, the lower Elliot
Formation and the Chinle Formation, and is probably latest Norian–
Rhaetian in age (Bandyopadhyay and Sengupta, 2006; Kutty et al.,
2007; Novas et al., 2011; Bandyopadhyay, 2016).
An association of Hyperodapedon, the derived phytosaurs
March 2020

451
including Volcanosuchus and Panthasaurus is found in the Tiki
Formation of the Rewa basin. Based on its palynofloral assemblage
(Maheswari and Kumaran, 1979) and faunal content (Bhat, 2018 and
references therein), the Tiki Formation has been correlated with the
lower Maleri Formation of the P-G Basin (Lucas, 1998; Datta, 2004)
and the Camp Springs Member of the Dockum Formation, U.S.A.
(Datta et al., 2004). A Carnian age was suggested for the Tiki
Formation (Datta, 2004; Mukherjee et al., 2012). It is evident that
the Tiki fauna may be placed within the Hyperodapedon biochron
(Lucas and Heckert, 2002) and the Ischigualastian LVF (Langer, 2005)
based on the abundance of Hyperodapedon in the fauna (Mukherjee
and Ray, 2012). Ray (2015) showed that the Tiki Formation may be
correlated with other horizons such as the lower part of the Pebbly
Arkose Formation, Zimbabwe, base of the Isalo II Beds (Mackay
Formation) of Madagascar, upper part of the Alemoa Member of the
Santa Maria Formation, Brazil, Wolfville Formation of Nova Scotia
and Popo Agie Formation of Wyoming (Fig. 8). Recently, a rich
assemblage of freshwater sharks, ceratodontiform dipnoans,
xenacanthids, and actinopterygians, and varied archosauriform teeth
has been reported, and shows similarity in faunal assemblage with
that of the lower Tecovas Formation of the Chinle Group (Ray et al.,
2016; Bhat et al., 2018a, b), which is early/middle Norian in age
(Martz and Parker, 2017). Moreover, Datta et al. (2019a, b) reported
the presence of more derived phytosaurs and absence of the basal
Parasuchusi from the formation. Hence, a late Carnian to early/middle
Norian age is proposed for the Tiki Formation.

Jurassic Vertebrate faunas
Faunal Characteristics
The end-Triassic witnessed an extinction event which is
considered as one of largest of the five major extinction events
(Benton, 1986; Olsen and Sues, 1986, Whiteside et al., 2010). At the
onset of the Jurassic when the supercontinent Pangaea started to break
up, world continued to be warm and arid in low- to mid- latitudes in
western Pangaea as indicated by the high latitude floras in Siberia
and lack of glacial deposits. While in the Late Jurassic this arid zone
spread towards southern Eurasia (Hallam, 1984). Sea levels began to
rise because of increase in sea-floor spreading and subsequently large
areas of the continents were flooded, the deserts began to retreat, and
continental temperatures stabilized (Tennant et al., 2016). The typical
Dicroidium-Ptilophyllum flora of the Gondwana was replaced by a
conifer-benettetilean flora of the Jurassic (Chatterjee et al., 2017). A
short-lived but widespread marine transgression at the beginning of
Jurassic resulted in advancement of shallow seas across the continents
(Haq, 2017), as a result of which the Early Jurassic terrestrial fossil
record is scarce (Tennant et al., 2016). India is no exception and the
terrestrial tetrapods of the Jurassic period are found only from P-G
Basin (Bandyopadhyay, 1999). There are two horizons, which have
produced Early Jurassic vertebrates, and these included the Kota
Formation and the underlying upper part of the Dharmaram Formation
(Bandyopadhyay and Roychowdhury, 1996). The upper Dharmaram
fauna includes two sauropodomorphs, Lamplughsaura
dharmaramensis and Pradhania gracilis, a theropod similar to
Dilophosaurus, and a sphenosuchid similar to Dibothrosuchus (Kutty
et al., 2007).
The overlying Kota Formation has been subdivided into two
lithological units (Rudra, 1982); the lower unit is dominated by
Episodes Vol. 43, no. 1

fluviatile sandstone-mudstone association while the upper part
includes marl and limestone beds. Rudra and Maulik (1994) suggested
that a meandering river system deposited the lower Kota and a braided
river system formed the upper part. Interestingly two distinct biozones
have been identified, where the lower fauna contains two sauropods,
Barapasaurus tagorei (Fig. 9A) and Kotasaurus yamanpalliensis
(Fig. 9B-C), an ankylosaur (Galton, 2019), a kuehneotheriid, an
amphilestid, and a morganucodontid (Table 4). From the limestone
of the upper part of the Kota Formation a diverse vertebrate fauna
has been reported, which includes three semionotid genera, two
pholidophorids, a coelacanthid, a kayentachelyid, a
campylognathoidid, two sphenodontians, and a lepidosaur. In addition,
there are seven mammaliaformes (Table 4) including two docodontids,
a morganucodontid, and an amphilestid (Bandyopadhyay et al., 2010).
The fauna also contains three mammaliaformes of uncertain affinities
(Table 4).

Intercontinental relationships
Early Jurassic tetrapod assemblages are known from the McCoy
Brook Formation of Nova Scotia, Canada (Sues et al., 1994; Fedak
et al., 2015), Moenave, Kayenta and Navajo formations, Arizona, in
USA (Schoch et al., 2010), La Boca Formation of Tamaulipas, Mexico
(Clark et al., 1994), and Lufeng Formation of Yunnan, China (Lucas
2009). In the Gondwanan region, the Elliott and Clarens formations
of South Africa (Knoll, 2005) and the Fallan Formation of Antarctica
(Hammer and Hickerson, 1996) are known for their Early Jurassic
vertebrates. The sedimentary succession of the Cañadón Asfalto
continental basin in the Argentinean Chubut Province of central
Patagonia preserves a rich record of Jurassic vertebrate fauna. A
sauropod-dominated fauna occurs in the Las Leoneras Formation,
which is Early Jurassic (Sinemurian to Pliensbachian) in age (Pol et
al., 2011). The next stratigraphically higher fauna occurs in the EarlyMiddle Jurassic Cañadón Asfalto Formation (Cúneo et al., 2013).
The Morrison Formation of USA (Foster, 2003) and the Tendaguru
Beds of Tanzania (Remes, 2007) are well known for their Late Jurassic
vertebrate fossils. However, most of the Early Jurassic vertebratebearing horizons of Europe are marine deposits (Delsate and Ezcurra,
2014).
In the light of studies on faunal turnover during Triassic-Jurassic
boundary by Olsen and Galton (1977) and Benton (1986), the upper
Dharmaram fauna represents the record of earliest Jurassic tetrapods
and a Hettangian age was assigned to the formation (Bandyopadhyay
and RoyChowdhury, 1996; Bandyopadhyay and Sengupta, 2006).
The fauna consists of two basal sauropodomorphs, a sphenosuchian
similar to Dibothrosuchus of the Lower Jurassic Lufeng Group, China
and a large theropod similar to Dilophosaurus of the Lower Jurassic
Kayenta Formation, Arizona (Kutty et al., 2007; Novas et al., 2011).
These authors further stated that the upper Dharmaram fauna is similar
to the faunas from the Upper Elliot and Clarens formations of South
Africa, the Kayenta Formation of USA and the lower Lufeng Group
of China, and suggested an Early Jurassic age (Sinemurian) for this
horizon. On the other hand, the Kota Formation has long been
considered to be of Liassic age (King, 1881; Robinson, 1970) on the
basis of its varied fish assemblage. Analyzing the faunas of the lower
and upper units of the Kota Formation and comparing them with
faunas from coeval horizons, Bandyopadhyay and Roychowdhury
(1996) and Bandyopadhyay and Sengupta (2006) assigned the lower
Kota fauna to an age ranging from Sinemurian to Pliensbachian and

452

Figure 9. Sauropod dinosaurs of the Kota Formation, A-B, Barapasaurus tagorei, A, a mounted skeleton; B, mounted manus in anterior
view; C-D, Kotasaurus yamanpalliensis, C, mounted neck and skull; D, a mounted skeleton.
March 2020

453
Table 4. Vertebrate fossil assemblage of the Jurassic Kota Formation of
India (after Bandyopadhyay et al., 2010; Parmar et al., 2013, Galton, 2019)
Family/clade

LOWER FAUNA

UPPER FAUNA

-

Lepidotes deccanensis

-

Paradapedium egertoni

-

Tetragonolepis oldhami

-

Pholidophorus kingi

PISCES
Semionotid

Pholidophorid

-

P. indicus

Coelacanthid

-

Indocoelacanthus robustus

TESTUDINATA

-

Kayentachelyidae

-

Indochelys spatulata

Campylognathoididae

-

Campylognathoides
indicus

Sphenodontia

-

Rebbanasaurus jaini

-

Godavarisaurus lateefi

Lepidosauria

-

Bharatagama rebbanensis

Sauropodomorpha

Barapasaurus
tagorei

-

Kotasaurus
yamanpalliensis

-

Ornithischia

Ankylosauridae

-

MAMMALIA

-

-

Docodontidae

-

Gondtherium dattai

Morganucodontidae

Indotherium
pranhitai
(=Indozostrodon
simpsoni)

Indotherium pranhitai

?Amphilestidae

Indotherium
pranhitai

Paikasigudodon yadagiri

Incertae sedis

-

Dyskritodon indicus

Kuehneotheriidae

-

Kotatherium haldanei

DIAPSIDA

Eobaataridae

Indobaatar zofiae

Incertae sedis

-

Nakunodon paikasiensis

Incertae sedis

-

Trishulotherium kotaensis

the upper Kota fauna to Toarcian, which may be extended to the
Middle Jurassic (?Aalenian).

Discussion and Concluding Remarks
In the backdrop of a Pangaean landscape, certain
macroevolutionary patterns and major transformations of vertebrate
evolution, especially of the tetrapods, are evident in the highly diverse
Gondwana fossil records of India. During the Late Permian, the
dicynodont-dominated fauna of the Kundaram Formation closely
resembles the dicynodont radiation in other Gondwanan regions,
especially the Beaufort Group of the Karoo Supergroup, South Africa
(Ray, 1999). The Permian-Triassic boundary in India is represented
by the transition from the Kundaram to the Kamthi formations of PG Basin and from the Raniganj to the Panchet formations of the
Damodar Basin. The generic diversity of the dicynodonts decreased
drastically at the onset of the Triassic (Fig. 10) as Lystrosaurus is the
Episodes Vol. 43, no. 1

only known genus from the Panchet and Kamthi formations. This
steady decrease is also true for the synapsid (excluding the early
mammals) diversity. Although collection bias cannot be ruled out,
such decrease in taxic diversity is correlated with the end-Permian
mass extinction, which resulted at least in part from a large scale
destabilization of carbon cycle (Bond and Grasby, 2017).
After the end-Permian extinction event, most of the ecological
niches became almost vacant, as a result of which the Early Triassic
exhibited a low faunal diversity, with Lystrosaurus, accounting > 90%
of the terrestrial vertebrates together with rare amphibians, but without
diverse herbivores and top predators (Benton, 1983; Chen and Benton,
2012). However, Damiani et al. (2003) discovered a more diverse
tetrapod assemblage from the Early Triassic Lystrosaurus AZ
exposures in Barendskraal of South Africa. The capitosaurs and
trematosaurids flourished during this period whereas the
archosauriforms formed a minor component. A similar faunal
transition is depicted by the Panchet fauna (Fig. 10), which shows a
highly diverse temnospondyl radiation involving several families such
as the trematosaurid, benthosuchid, rhytidosteid, lapillopsid,
tupilakosaurid and brachyopid temnospondyls, which is comparable
with that of other coeval Gondwanan and Laurasian regions.
Mukherjee et al. (2010) suggested that the small size of the
trematosaurids and Lystrosaurus (Shishkin et al., 1996; Ray, 2005)
reflects the ‘Lilliput effect’ as documented by Twitchett (2007).
Moreover, the fast growth strategy adopted by the trematosaurids was
linked to the rapid invasion of various empty Panchet ecological niches
in the aftermath of the end-Permian mass extinction (Mukherjee et
al., 2010). The Panchet and Kamthi fauna may be considered as the
late Palaeozoic ‘holdover’ fauna as described by Romer (1966) and
Padian and Sues (2015).
A significant change occurred in the composition of terrestrial
tetrapod communities during the Middle Triassic. The diversity and
the number of archosauromorphs especially the rhynchosaurs
increased considerably. Two principal lineages of Archosauria,
Ornithodira and Crurotarsi and two groups of therapsids,
kannemeyeriiform dicynodonts and gomphodont cynodonts, appeared
and diversified considerably in the Gondwanan regions (Fraser and
Sues, 2011). In India although a decrease in diversity at the
temnospondyl family-level is evident during the Middle Triassic
(Fig. 10), several new capitosaur taxa such as Paracyclotosaurus
crookshanki and Cherninia denwai of the Denwa Formation appeared
during this time. This period also witnessed the radiation of the
dicynodonts, albeit in small numbers compared to the Late Permian
diversity (Fig. 10) and is represented by several kannemeyeriiform
taxa from the Yerrapalli and Denwa formations (Table 2). Moreover
a decrease in dominance of the synapsids, and increase in diversity
and radiation of the diapsids (archosauromorphs) in the form of
rhynchosaurids, allokotosaurs, aphanosaurs and erythrosuchids
(Fig. 10) is also noticed in this period.
During the Late Triassic, terrestrial ecosystems exhibited
widespread and dramatic changes in the composition of vertebrate
communities resulting in a biologically diverse fauna (Sues and Fraser,
2010; Irmis and Whiteside, 2011). Taxonomic richness was a rapidly
ascending phenomenon whereas taxonomic relative abundances were
qualitatively quite stable in the Late Triassic (Olsen et al., 2011).
Morphological disparity was relatively high during this time (Brusatte
et al., 2008) and evidence of high biogeographic provinciality was
provided by Olsen et al., (2011) from the Norian–Rhaetian Chinle–
Dockum assemblages and the Germanic basin type assemblages of

454

Figure 10. Graphical representation of the Permian-Jurassic taxic diversity in the different Gondwana stratigraphic horizons of India.
Subsequently darker shades of grey indicate subdivision of the Triassic into Early, Middle and Late. Sources of information: Chatterjee
(1980, 1982, 1987), Bandyopadhyay (1999, 2011), Ray (1999, 2001), Kutty et al. (2007), Novas et al. (2011), Kammerer et al. (2016),
Mukherjee and Ray (2014), Chakravorti and Sengupta (2019), Ray et al. (2016, 2019).
the Central Europe and Greenland of Carnian–Rhaetian age. Both
the ‘archaic’ and the ‘modern’ taxa are noted during the Late Triassic.
The dicynodont therapsids, procolophonid parareptiles and
chroniosuchian anthracosaurs represented the ‘archaic’. The ancestors
of modern tetrapod communities such as the crocodyliforms,
lepidosaurs, mammaliaforms and turtles appeared during Late Triassic,
along with the oldest frogs, salamanders and caecilians, dinosaurs,
pterosaurs and mammals, which also had their origin during this period
(Fraser and Sues, 2011). Similar high diversity and radiation of
vertebrates are also seen in the Indian scenario, especially in the advent
of different types of freshwater fishes (hybodontids, xenacanthids,
actinopterygians and dipnoans), temnospondyls (metoposaurids and
chigutisaurids) archosauromorphs (archosauriforms, phytosaurs and
basal saurischians including sauropodomorphs), and cynodonts
including the early mammaliaforms. This period is characterized by
the appearances and disappearances of ‘indigenous fauna’ such as
the phytosaurs and appearance of ‘living’ fauna (sensu Romer, 1966;
Padian and Sues, 2015), which included the basal saurischians and
mammaliaforms. The Late Triassic vertebrates of India comprise
distinct faunal assemblages, which are more or less comparable to
the global Triassic vertebrate faunachrons, especially of the Carnian
(sensu Lucas, 1998, 2010; Gradstein et al., 2012; Tanner, 2018). The
Triassic-Jurassic transition is marked by a distinct faunal change,
where the phytosaurs and aetosaurs of the upper Maleri and lower
Dharmaram changes to a new upper Dharmaram fauna comprising
sphenosuchians (Bandyopadhyay and Sengupta, 2006). This marked
biotic turnover may be correlated with the drastic climatic change at
the Triassic-Jurassic transition, which experienced global warming
because of a four-fold increase in atmospheric CO2 that probably
derived from volcanism (Bond and Grasby, 2017; Tennant et al., 2017).

Hence, it may be concluded that the Late Permian-early Middle
Jurassic Gondwanan vertebrates of India reflect major global faunal
fluctuations and transitions, macroevolutionary patterns and constitute
important biostratigraphic markers for global correlation of the Indian
stratigraphic horizons.

Acknowledgements
We are thankful to Dr. Fareeduddin, Chair, Legacy Committee of
36th International Congress and Prof. G.V.R. Prasad of Delhi
University, the Subject Editor who invited us to contribute an article
for the proposed publication titled “Geodynamic Evolution of the
Indian Subcontinent- Hadean to Recent”. We are indebted to late
Prof. Tapan RoyChowdhury for introducing us to the world of
Vertebrate Palaeontology. One of us (SB) thanks Prof. D. P. Sengupta
of the Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata, who shared his views on
the Panchet fauna. SR thanks Mr. Debajit Datta of the Indian Institute
of Technology, Kharagpur for drafting the geological map of the P-G
Basin. The authors are thankful to Prof. H. D. Sues and another
anonymous reviewer for their suggestions which has upgraded the
paper. Finally, the authors are grateful to the authorities of the Indian
Statistical Institute and the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
for infrastructure facilities.

References
Abdala, F., and Ribeiro, A.M., 2010, Distribution and diversity
patterns of Triassic cynodonts (Therapsida, Cynodontia) in
Gondwana. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology,
v. 286, pp. 202–217.
March 2020

455
Abdala, F., and Smith, R.M.H., 2009, A Middle Triassic cynodont
fauna from Namibia and its implications for the biogeography of
Gondwana, Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, v. 29, pp. 837–
851.
Abdala, F., Hancox, P.J., and Neveling, J., 2005, Cynodonts from the
uppermost Burgersdorp Formation, South Africa, and their bearing
on the biostratigraphy and correlation of the Triassic Cynognathus
Assemblage Zone. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, v. 25, pp.
192–199.
Angielczyk, K.D., Sebastien, H., Smith, R.M.H., Tabor, N.J., Sidor,
C.A., Steyer, J-S., Tsuji, L.A., and Gostling, N.J., 2014, New
Dicynodonts (Therapsida, Anomodontia) and updated tetrapod
stratigraphy of the Permian Ruhuhu Formation (Songea Group,
Ruhuhu Basin) of Southern Tanzania. Journal of Vertebrate
Paleontology, v. 34, pp. 1408–1426.
Arcucci, A.B., Marsicano, C.A., and Caselli, A.C., 2004, Tetrapod
association and palaeoenvironment of the Los Colorados
Formation (Argentina): a significant sample from western
Gondwana at the end of the Triassic. Geobios, v. 37, pp. 557–
568.
Bandyopadhyay, S., 1988a, A kannemeyeriid dicynodont from the
Middle Triassic Yerrapalli Formation. Philosophical Transaction
of the Royal society of London, v. B320, pp. 185–233.
Bandyopadhyay, S., 1988b, Vertebrate fossils from the PranhitaGodavari valley of India with special reference to the Yerrapalli
Formation. Modern Geology, v. 13, pp. 107-117.
Bandyopadhyay, S., 1999, Gondwana vertebrate faunas of India.
Proceedings of the Indian National Science Academy, v. A65,
pp. 285–313.
Bandyopadhyay, S., 2011, Non-marine Triassic vertebrates of India,
In: Calvo, J.O., Porfiri, J., Gonzalez Riga, B., and Dos Santos,
D. (Eds), Paleontología y dinosaurios desde América Latina.
EDIUNC, Editorial de la Universidad Nacional de Cuyo,
Mendoza, Argentina, pp. 33-46.
Bandyopadhyay, S., 2016, Glimpses of Triassic Life in India,
Developments in Geosciences in the Past Decade. Emerging
Trends for the Future and Impact on Society and Annual General
Meeting of the Geological Society of India, Seminar Abstract
Volume, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India, p. 28–
32.
Bandyopadhyay, S., and Roy Chowdhury, T., 1996, Beginning of the
continental Jurassic in India – a palaeontological approach.
Museum of Northern Arizona, Bulletin, v. 60, pp. 371–378.
Bandyopadhyay, S., and Sengupta, D.P., 1999, Middle Triassic
vertebrate faunas from India. Journal of African Earth Sciences,
v. 29, pp. 233–241.
Bandyopadhyay, S., and Sengupta, D.P., 2006, Vertebrate faunal
turnover during the Triassic Jurassic transition: an Indian scenario.
In: Harris, J., Lucas, S.G., Spielmann, J.A., Lockley, M.G., Milner,
A.R.C., and Kirkland, J.I. (Eds.), The Triassic - Jurassic Terrestrial
Transition. New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science
Bulletin, v. 37, pp. 77–85.
Bandyopadhyay, S., Gillette, D.D., Ray, S., and Sengupta, D.P. 2010,
Osteology of Barapasaurus tagorei (Dinosauria: Sauropoda) from
the early Jurassic of India. Palaeontology, v. 53, pp. 533–569.
Banks, M.R., 1978, Correlation chart for the Triassic System of
Australia. Bulletin of the Bureau of the Mineral Resources, v.
156C, pp. 1–46.
Barberena, M.C., Araujo, D.C., and Lavina, E.L., 1975, Late Permian
and Triassic tetrapods of Southern Brazil. National Geographic
Research 1985 Winter, p.5-20.
Barberena M.C., Araujo D.C., Lavina E.L., and Faccini U.F., 1991,
The evidence for close paleofaunistic affinity between South
America and Africa. In International Gondwana Symposium, 7,
Episodes Vol. 43, no. 1

São Paulo, 1988, Proceedings, p. 455–467.
Benton, M.J., 1983, The Triassic reptile Hyperodapedon from Elgin:
functional morphology and relationships. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London, v. B302, pp. 605–
717.
Benton, M.J., 1986, The Late Triassic tetrapod extinction events. In:
Padian, K. (Ed.), The beginning of the Age of Dinosaurs.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, pp. 303–320.
Bernardi, M., Petti, F.M., Kustatscher, E., Franz, M., Hartkopf-Frçder,
C., Labandiera, C. C., Wapler, T., van Konijnenburg-van Cittert,
H. A., Peecook, B.R., and Angielczyk, K.D., 2017, Late Permian
(Lopingian) terrestrial ecosystems: a global comparison with new
data from the low-latitude Bletterbach Biota, Earth Science
Reviews v. 175, pp. 18–43.
Bhat, M.S., 2018, A new assemblage of vertebrate microfossils from
India: a window on Late Triassic biodiversity and
palaeobiogeography. Unpublished Ph.D Thesis, Indian Institute
of Technology, Kharagpur, 237pp.
Bhat, M.S., and Ray, S., 2018, A record of new lungfishes
(Osteichthyes: Dipnoi) from the Carnian (Upper Triassic) of India.
Historical
Biology,
https://doi.org/10.
1080/
08912963.2018.1499020.
Bhat, M.S., Ray, S., and Datta, P.M., 2018a, A new hybodont shark
(Chondrichthyes, Elasmobranchii) from the Upper Triassic Tiki
Formation of India with remarks on its dental histology and
biostratigraphy. Journal of Paleontology, v. 92, pp. 221–239.
Bhat, M.S., Ray, S., and Datta, P. M., 2018b, A new assemblage of
freshwater sharks (Chondrichthyes: elasmobranchii) from the
Upper Triassic of India. Geobios, v. 51, pp. 269–283.
Biswas, S.K., 2003, Regional tectonic framework of the PranhitaGodavari basin, India. Journal of Asian Earth Science, v. 21, pp.
1–9.
Bonaparte, J.F., 1978, El Mesozóico de América de Sur y sus
Tetrapodos - The Mesozoic of South America and its tetrapods.
Opera Lilloana, v. 26, pp. 1–596.
Bond, D.P.G., and Grasby, S.E., 2017, On the causes of mass
extinction. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology,
v. 478, pp. 3–29.
Brusatte, S.L., Benton, M.J., Ruta, M., and Lloyd, G.T., 2008,
Superiority, competition, and opportunism in the evolutionary
radiation of dinosaurs. Science, v. 321, pp. 1486–1488.
Buffa, V., Jalil, N.E. and Steyer J.S., 2019, Redescription of
Arganasaurus (Metoposaurus) azerouali (Dutuit) comb. nov. from
the Upper Triassic of the Argana Basin (Morocco), and the first
phylogenetic analysis of the Metoposauridae (Amphibia,
Temnospondyli). Papers in Palaeontology, doi: 10.1002/
spp2.1259
Castanhinha, R., Araújo, R., Júnior, L.C., Angielczyk, K.D., Martins,
G.G., Martins, R.M. S., Chaouiya, C., Beckmann, F., and Wilde,
W., 2013, Bringing dicynodonts back to life: paleobiology and
anatomy of a new emydopoid genus from the Upper Permian of
Mozambique, Plos One, v. 8, e80974. https://doi.org/10.1371 /
journal.pone.0080974
Catuneanu, O.,Wopfner, H., Eriksson, P. G., Cairncross, B., Rubidge,
B. S., Smith, R. M. H. and Hancox, P. J., 2005, The Karoo basins
of south-central Africa. Journal of African Earth Sciences, v. 43,
pp. 211-253.
Chakravorti, S., and Sengupta, D.P., 2019, Taxonomy, morphometry
and morphospace of cranial bones of Panthasaurus gen. nov.
maleriensis from the Late Triassic of India. Journal of Iberian
Geology, v. 45, pp. 317–340.
Chakraborty, C., Mandal, N. and Ghosh, S.K., 2003, Kinematics of
the Gondwana basins of peninsular India. Tectonophysics, v. 377,
pp. 299–324.

456
Chatterjee, S., 1974, A rhynchosaur from the Upper Triassic Maleri
Formation of India. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society London, v. B267, pp. 209 261.
Chatterjee, S., 1978, A primitive parasuchid (phytosaur) reptile from
the Upper Triassic Maleri Fornmation of India. Palaeontology, v.
21, pp. 83–127.
Chatterjee, S., 1980, The evolution of rhynchosaurs. Memoires de la
Société Géologique de France, v. 139, pp. 57–65.
Chatterjee, S., 1982, A new cynodont reptile from the Triassic of
India. Journal of Palaeontology, v. 56, pp. 203–214.
Chatterjee, S., and Mazumdar, P.K., 1987, Tikisuchus romeri, a new
rauisuchid reptile from the Late Triassic of India. Journal of
Paleontology, v. 61, pp. 787–793.
Chatterjee, S., Scotese, C.R. and Bajpai, S., 2017, The restless Indian
plate and its epic voyage from Gondwana to Asia: its tectonic,
paleoclimatic, and paleobiogeographic evolution. Geological
Society of America Special Paper, v. 529, p. 1–147.
Chen, Z.-Q., and Benton, M. J., 2012, The timing and pattern of
biotic recovery following the end-Permian mass extinction. Nature
Geoscience, v. 5, pp. 375–383.
Cisneros, J. C., and Abdala, F., 2005, Pareiasaurids from the Rio Do
Rasto Formation, southern Brazil: Biostratigraphic implications
for Permian faunas of the Parana Basin, Revista Brasileira de
Palaeontologia, v. 8, pp. 13–24.
Clark, J., Montellano, M., Hopson, J. A., Hernandez, R. and Fastovsky,
D. A., 1994, An Early or Middle Jurassic tetrapod assemblage
from the La Boca Formation, northeastern Mexico. In: Fraser,
N.C., and Sues H.-D. (Eds.). In The Shadow of the Dinosaurs:
Early Mesozoic Tetrapods, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, pp. 295–302.
Cosgriff, J.W., 1984, The temnospondyl labyrinthodonts from the
earliest Triassic. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, v. 4, pp. 30–
46.
Colbert, E.H. and Kitching, J.W., 1977, Triassic cynodont reptiles
from Antarctica. American Museum Novitates, no. 2611, pp. 130.
Cotter, G., and De P., 1917, A revised classification of the Gondwana
system. Record of the Geological Survey of India, v. 48, pp. 23–
33.
Crookshank, H., 1936, Geology of the northern slopes of the Satpura
between the Morand and Sher rivers. Geological Survey of India,
Memoirs, v. 66, pp. 173–381.
Cox, C.B., 1991, The Pangean dicynodont Rechnisaurus and the
comparative biostratigraphy of Triassic dicynodont fauna.
Palaeontology, v. 34, pp. 767–784.
Cúneo, R., Ramezani, J., Scasso, R., Pol, D., Escapa, I., Zavattieri,
A.M., and Browning, S.A., 2013, High precision U-Pb
geochronology and a new chronostratigraphy for the Cañadón
Asfalto Basin, Chubut, central Patagonia: implications for
terrestrial faunal and floral evolution in Jurassic. Gondwana
Research, v. 24, pp. 1267–1275.
Damiani, R., Neveling, J., Modesto, S., and Yates, A.M., 2003,
Barendskraal, a diverse amniote locality from the Lystrosaurus
Assemblage Zone, Early Triassic of South Africa. Palaeontologia
Africana, v. 39, pp. 53–62.
Das, D.P., and Gupta, A., 2012, A New Cynodont Record from the
Lower Triassic Panchet Formation, Damodar Valley, Journal
Geological Society of India, v. 79, pp. 175–180.
Dasgupta, S., and Ghosh, P., 2018, Freshwater carbonates within a
Late Triassic siliciclastic fluvial system in a Gondwana rift basin:
the Maleri Formation, India. Sedimentary Geology, v. 373, pp.
254–271.
Dasgupta, S., Ghosh, P., and Gierlowski-Kordesch, E.H., 2017, A
discontinuous ephemeral stream transporting mud aggregates in

a continental rift basin: the Late Triassic Maleri Formation, India.
Journal of Sedimentary Research, v. 87, pp. 838–865.
Datta, D., Kumar, N., and Ray, S., 2019a, Taxonomic identification
of isolated phytosaur (Diapsida, Archosauria) teeth from the Upper
Triassic of India and their significances. Historical Biology, doi:
10.1080/08912963.2019.1613652
Datta, D., Ray, S., and Bandyopadhyay, S., 2019b. Cranial morphology
of a new phytosaur (Diapsida, archosauria) from the Upper
Triassic of India: implications for phytosaur phylogeny and
biostratigraphy. Papers in Palaeontology, doi: 10.1002/spp2.1292.
Datta, P.M., 2004, A suggestion for an early Tuvalian time segment
for the Tiki Formation, South Rewa Gondwana basin, India and
other correlatable continental sequences. Albertina, v. 30 (suppl),
pp. 6–7.
Datta, P.M., 2005, Earliest mammal with transversely expanded upper
molar from the Late Triassic (Carnian) Tiki Formation, South
Rewa Gondwana basin, India. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology,
v. 25, pp. 200–207.
Datta, P.M., and Das, D.P., 1996, Discovery of the oldest mammal
from India. Indian Minerals, v. 50, pp. 217–222.
Datta, P.M., and Ray, S., 2006, Earliest lizards from the Late Triassic
(Carnian) of India. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, v. 26, pp.
795–800.
Datta, P.M., Das, D.P., and Luo, Z.X., 2004, A Late Triassic
dromatheriid (Synapsida: Cynodontia) from India. Annals of the
Carnegie Museum, v. 73, pp. 72–84.
Delsate, D., and Ezcurra, M. D., 2014, The first Early Jurassic (late
Hettangian) theropod dinosaur remains from the Grand Duchy of
Luxembourg. Geologica Belgica, v. 17, pp. 175–181.
Deutsche Stratigraphische Kommisson, 2005, Stratographie von
Deutschland, IV — Keuper, Courier Forschungsinstitute
Senckenberg, v. 254, pp. 1–296.
Dineen, A.A., Fraiser, M.L., and Sheehan, P.M., 2014, Quantifying
functional diversity in pre and post-extinction paleocommunities:
A test of ecological restructuring after the end-Permian mass
extinction. Earth Science Reviews, v. 136, pp. 339–349.
Dutuit, J.M., 1972, Discovery of an ornithischian dinosaur in the
Upper Triassic of the Moroccan western Atlas. Comptes Rendus
de l’Académie des Sciences à Paris, Série D, v. 275, pp. 2841–
2844.
Dzik, J., and Sulej, T., 2007, A Review of the early Late Triassic
Krasiejow biota from Silesia, Poland. Acta Palaeontologia
Polonica, v. 64, pp. 1–27.
Dzik, J., Sulej, T., and NiedŸwiedzki, G., 2007, A dicynodonttheropod association in the latest Triassic of Poland. Acta
Palaeontologica Polonica, v. 53, pp. 733–738.
Fedak, T.J., Sues, H.D., and Olsen, P.E., 2015, First record of the
tritylodontid cynodont Oligokyphus and cynodont postcranial
bones from the McCoy Brook Formation of Nova Scotia, Canada.
Canadian Journal of the Earth Science, v. 52, pp. 244–249.
Fortuny, J., Arbez, T., Mujal, E., and Steyer, J.S., 2019, Reappraisal
of ‘Metoposaurus hoffmani’ Dutuit 1978, and description of new
temnospondyl specimens from the Middle-Late Triassic of
Madagascar (Morondava Basin). Journal of Vertebrate
Paleontology, doi: 10.1080/02724634.2019.1576701
Foster, J.R., 2003, Palaeoecological analysis of the vertebrate fauna
of the Morrison Formation (Upper Jurassic) Rocky Mountain
region, USA. Bulletin of the New Mexico Museum of Natural
History and Science, v. 23, pp. 1–95.
Fraser, N.C., 2006, Dawn of the Dinosaurs: Life in the Triassic. Indiana
University Press, Bloomington, 328 p.
Fraser, N.C., and Sues, H.D., 2011, The beginning of the ‘Age of
Dinosaurs’: a brief overview of terrestrial biotic changes during
the Triassic. Earth and Environmental Science Transactions of
March 2020

457
the Royal Society of Edinburgh, v. 101, pp. 189–200.
Fröbisch, J., 2009, Composition and similarity of global anomodontbearing tetrapod faunas. Earth Science Reviews, v. 95, pp. 119–
157.
Flynn, J.J., Parrish, J.M., Rakotosamimanana, B., Simpson, W.F.,
Whatley, R.L., and Wyss, A.R., 1999, A Triassic fauna from
Madagascar including earliest dinosaurs. Science, v. 286, pp. 763–
765.
Galton, P. M., 2019, Earliest record of an ankylosaurian dinosaur
(Ornithischia Thyreophora): Dermal armour from Lower Kota
Formation (Lower Jurassic) of India. Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie
und Paläontologie - Abhandlungen, v. 291 (2), pp. 205–219.
Gandin, A., Tongiorgi, M., Rau, A., and Virgili, C., 1982, Some
examples of the Middle-Triassic Marine transgression in SouthWestern Mediterranean Europe. Geologische Rundschau, v.
71, pp. 881–894.
Gradstein, F.M., Ogg, J.G., Schmitz, M.D., and Ogg, G.M., 2012,
The Geologic Time Scale 2012. Elsevier Publications, UK, 1144
p.
Gupta, A., 2009, Ichthyofauna of the Lower Triassic Panchet
Formation, Damodar valley basin, West Bengal, and its
implications. Indian Journal of Geosciences, v. 63, pp. 275–286.
Gupta, A. and Das, D.P. 2011, Report of Lystrosaurus cf. curvatus
and L. cf. declivis from the Early Triassic Panchet Formation,
Damodar Valley, West Bengal, India and its implications. Indian
Journal of Geosciences, v. 65, pp. 119–130.
Hallam, A., 1984, Continental humid and arid zones during the
Jurassic and Cretaceous. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology,
Palaeoecology, v. 47, pp. 195–223.
Hallam, A., 1992, Phanerozoic Sea-level Changes. Columbia
University Press, New York, 266 p.
Hammer W.R., and Hickerson W.J., 1996, Implications of an Early
Jurassic vertebrate fauna from Antarctica. Museum of Northern
Arizona Bulletin, v. 60, pp. 215–218.
Haq, B.U., 2017, Jurassic sea-level variations; a reappraisal. GSA
Today, v. 1. doi: 10.1130/GSATG359A
Hautmann, M., 2014, Diversification and diversity partitioning.
Paleobiology, v. 40, pp. 162–176.
He, M., Jin, Z., Li, T., Guo, X., and Yang, T., 2014, Stratigraphic
framework and microfacies of the Triassic Lower Karamay
Formation in districts I, III, NW Junggar, China. Journal of Earth
Science, v. 25(6), pp. 1003–1017.
Heckert, A.B., 2004, Late Triassic microvertebrates from the Upper
Triassic Chinle Group (Otischalkian-Adamanian: Carnian),
southwestern U.S.A. New Mexico Museum of Natural History
and Science Bulletin, v. 27, pp. 1–170.
Hofmann, R., Hautmann, M., Wasmer, M., and Bucher, H., 2013,
Palaeoecology of the Spathian Virgin Formation (Utah, USA)
and its implications for the Early Triassic recovery. Acta
Palaeontologica Poland, v. 58, pp.149–173.
Hungerbühler, A., Kutty, T.S., and Chatterjee, S., 2002, New
phytosaurs from the Upper Triassic of India. Journal of Vertebrate
Paleontology, v. 22(Suppl. 3), pp. 68A.
Hutchinson, M.N., Skinner, A., and Lee, M.S.Y., 2012, Tikiguania
and the antiquity of squamate reptiles (lizards and snakes). Biology
Letters Royal Society, v. 8, pp. 665–669.
Huxley, T.H., 1865, On a collection of vertebrate fossil from Panchet
rocks, Raniganj coalfield. Palaeontologica Indica, v. 4, pp. 2–24.
Irmis, R.B., and Whiteside, J.H., 2011, Delayed recovery of nonmarine tetrapods after the end-Permian mass extinction tracks
global carbon cycle. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London,
v. B279, https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2011.1895.
Irmis, R.B., Martz, J.W., Parker, W.G., and Nesbitt, S.J., 2010, Reevaluating the correlation between Late Triassic terrestrial
Episodes Vol. 43, no. 1

vertebrate biostratigraphy and the GSSP-defined marine stages.
Albertiana, v. 38, pp.40–52.
Irmis, R.B., Mundil, R., Martz, J.W., and Parker, W.G., 2011, Highresolution U-Pb ages from the Upper Triassic Chinle Formation
(New Mexico, USA) support a diachronous rise of dinosaurs.
Earth and Planetary Science Letters, v. 309, pp. 258–267.
Jain, S.L., Robinson, P.L., and Roy Chowdhury, T.K., 1964, A new
vertebrate fauna from the Triassic of Deccan, India. Journal of
the Geological Society of London, v. 120, pp. 115 124.
Kammerer, C.F., Bandyopadhyay, S., and Ray, S., 2016, A new taxon
of cistecephalid dicynodont from the upper Permian Kundaram
Formation of India. Papers in Palaeontology, v. 2, pp. 569–584.
Keyser, A.W., 1973, A new Triassic vertebrate Fauna from South West
Africa. Palaeontolgia Africana, v. 16, pp. 1–15.
King, G.M., 1992, The palaeobiogeography of Permian anomodonts.
Terra Nova, v. 4, pp. 633–640.
King, W., 1881, The geology of the Pranhita-Godavari valley. Memoir
of Geological Survey of India, v. 18, pp. 151–311.
Kitching, J.W., Collinson, J.W., Elliot, D.H., and Colbert, E.H., 1972,
Lystrosaurus Zone (Triassic) Fauna from Antarctica. Science, v.
175, pp. 524–527.
Knoll, F., 2005, The tetrapod fauna of the Upper Elliot and Clarens
formations in the main Karoo Basin (South Africa and Lesotho).
Bulletin de la Société Géologique de France, v. 176, pp. 81–91.
Kutty, T.S., 1972, Permian reptilian fauna from India. Nature, v. 237,
pp. 462–463.
Kutty, T.S., and Sengupta, D.P., 1989, Late Triassic formations of the
Pranhita-Godavari valley and their vertebrate faunal sequence - a
reappraisal, Indian Journal of Earth Science, v. 16, pp. 189–206.
Kutty, T.S., Jain, S.L., and Roy Chowdhury, T., 1987, Gondwana
sequence of the northern Pranhita-Godavari Valley: its stratigraphy
and vertebrate faunas. The Palaeobotanist, v. 36, pp. 214–219.
Kutty, T.S., Chatterjee, S., Galton, P.M., and Upchurch, P., 2007,
Basal sauropodomorphs (Dinosauria: Saurischia) from the Lower
Jurassic of India: their anatomy and relationships. Journal of
Paleontology, v. 81, pp. 1218–1240.
Langer, M.C., 2005, Studies on continental Late Triassic tetrapod
biochronology. II. The Ischigualastian and a Carnian global
correlation. Journal of South American Earth Sciences, v. 19, pp.
219–239.
Langer, M.C., Ribeiro, A.M., Schultz, C.L., and Ferigolo, J., 2007,
The continental tetrapod–bearing Triassic of South Brazil. Bulletin
of the New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science, v.
41, pp. 201–218.
Langer, M.C., Da Rosa, Á.A.S., and Montefeltro, F.C., 2017,
Supradapedon revisited: geological explorations in the Triassic
of southern Tanzania. PeerJ, v. 5, https://doi.org/10.7717/
peerj.4038.
Langer, M.C., Ramezani, J., and Da Rosa, Á.A.S., 2018, U-Pb age
constraints on dinosaur rise from south Brazil. Gondwana
Research, v. 18, pp. 133–140.
Long, R.A., and Murry, P.A., 1995, Late Triassic (Carnian and Norian)
tetrapods from the southwestern United States. Bulletin of the
New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science, v. 4, pp.
1–254.
Lucas, S.G., 1998, Global Triassic tertapod biostratigraphy and
biochronology. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology,
Palaeoecology, v. 143, pp. 347–384.
Lucas, S.G., 2009, Global Jurassic tetrapod biochronology. Volumina
Jurassica v. 6, pp. 99–108.
Lucas, S.G., 2010, The Triassic timescale based on nonmarine
tetrapod biostratigraphy and biochronology, In: Lucas, S.G. (Ed),
The Triassic Timescale. Geological Society, London, Special
Publications, v. 334, pp. 447–500.

458
Lucas, S.G., 2018, Late Triassic terrestrial tetrapods: Biostratigraphy,
biochronology and biotic events, 351–405. In: Tanner, L.H. (Ed),
The Late Triassic World: Earth in a Time of Transition, Topics in
Geobiology. Springer, New York, v. 46, 805 pp.
Lucas, S.G., and Heckert, A.B., 2002, The Hyperodapedon biochron,
Late Triassic of Pangaea. Albertiana, v. 27, pp. 30–38.
Lydekker, R., 1885a, The labyrinthodont from the Bijori Group,
Memoir Geological Survey of India, Palaeontologia Indica, v.4,
p.1–16.
Lydekker, R., 1885b, The Reptilia and Amphibia of the Maleri and
Denwa groups. Memoir Geological Survey of India,
Palaeontologia Indica. v. 5, pp. 1–38.
Maheswari, H.K., and Kumaran, K.P.N., 1979, Upper Triassic Sporae
Dispersae from the Tiki Formation 1: Miospores from the Son
River Section between Tharipathar and Ghiyar, South Rewa
Gondwana Basin. Paleontographica, v. B71, pp.1–126.
Martínez, R.N., Sereno, P.C., Alcober, O.A., Colombi, C.E, Renne,
P.R., Montañez, I.P., and Currie, B.S., 2011, A basal dinosaur
from the dawn of the dinosaur era in southwestern Pangaea.
Science, v. 331, pp. 206–210.
Martz, J.W., and Parker, W.G., 2017, Revised formulation of the Late
Triassic Land Vertebrate “Faunachrons” of western North
America: recommendations for codifying nascent systems of
vertebrate biochronology, 39–125, In: Zeigler, K.E., and Parker,
W.G. (Eds), Terrestrial Depositional Systems: Deciphering
Complexities Through Multiple Stratigraphic Methods. Elsevier,
346 pp.
Martz, J.W., Mueller, B., Nesbitt, S.J., Stocker, M.R., Parker, W.G.,
Atanassov, M., Fraser, N., Weinbaum, J., and Lehane, J., 2013, A
taxonomic and biostratigraphic re-evaluation of the Post Quarry
vertebrate assemblage from the Cooper Canyon Formation
(Dockum Group, Upper Triassic) of southern Garza County,
western Texas. Earth and Environmental Science Transactions of
the Royal Society of Edinburgh, v. 103, pp. 339–364.
Maulik, P.K., Chakraborty, C., Ghosh, P., and Rudra, D., 2000, Mesoand macro-scale architecture of a Triassic fluvial succession:
Denwa Formation, Satpura Gondwana basin, Madhya Pradesh.
Journal of the Geological Society of India, v. 56, pp. 489–504.
Mazin, J.M., and King, G.M., 1991, The first dicynodont from the
Late Permian of Malagasy. Palaeontology, v. 34, pp. 837–842.
Milner, A.R., Gardiner, B.G., Fraser, N.C., and Taylor, M.A., 1990,
Vertebrates from the Middle Triassic Otter Sandstone Formation
of Devon. Palaeontology, v. 33, pp. 873–892.
Mukherjee, D., and Ray, S., 2012, Taphonomy of an Upper Triassic
vertebrate bonebed-A new rhynchosaur accumulation from India.
Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, v. 333–334,
pp. 75–91.
Mukherjee, D., and Ray, S., 2014, A new Hyperodapedon
(Archosauromorpha, Rhynchosauria) from the Upper Triassic of
India: implications for rhynchosaur phylogeny. Palaeontology, v.
57, pp. 1241–1276.
Mukherjee, D., Ray, S., and Sengupta, D.P., 2010, Preliminary
observations on the bone microstructure, growth patterns, and
life habits of some Triassic temnospondyls from India. Journal of
Vertebrate Paleontology, v. 30, pp. 78–93.
Mukherjee, D., Sengupta, D.P., and Rakshit, N., 2019, New biological
insights into the Middle Triassic capitosaurs from India as deduced
from limb bone anatomy and histology. Papers in Palaeontology,
doi: 10.1002/spp2.1263
Mukherjee, D., Ray, S., Pal, S., Chandra, S., and Bandyopadhyay, S.,
2012, Upper Gondwana succession of the Rewa basin, India:
understanding the interrelationship of lithologic and stratigraphic
variables. Journal of the Geological Society of India, v. 79, pp.
563–575.

Mukherjee, R.N., and Sengupta D.P., 1998, New capitosaurid
amphibians from the middle Triassic Denwa Formation of Satpura
Gondwanas, Central India. Alcheringa, v. 22, pp. 317–327.
Mukhopadhyay, G., Mukhopadhyay, S.K., Roychowdhury, M., and
Parui, P.K., 2010, Stratigraphic correlation between different
Gondwana basins of India. Journal of the Geological Society of
India, v. 76, pp. 251–266
Nath, T.T., and Yadagiri, P., 2007, A new mammal-like reptile
(Cynodontia) from the Upper Triassic Maleri Formation of
Pranhita-Godavari valley, Andhra Pradesh. Journal of the
Geological Society of India, v. 69, pp. 57–60.
Nesbitt, S.J., Butler, R.J., Ezcurra, M.D., Barrett, P. M., Stocker, M.R.,
Angielcyzk, K.D., Smith, R.M.H., Sidor, C.A., NiedŸweidzki,
G., Sennikov, A. G., and Charig, A.J., 2017, The earliest bird-line
archosaurs and the assembly of the dinosaur body plan. Nature,
v. 544, pp. 484–487.
Novas, F.E., Ezcurra, M.D., Chatterjee, S., and Kutty, T.S., 2011,
New dinosaur species from the Upper Triassic Upper Maleri and
Lower Dharmaram formations of Central India. Transactions of
the Royal Society of Edinburgh, v. 101, pp. 333–349.
Ogg, J.G., Ogg, G., and Gradstein, F.M., 2016, A concise geologic
time scale 2016. Elsevier, USA, 233 p.
Olsen, P.E., and Galton, P.M., 1977, Triassic-Jurassic tetrapod
extinctions: are they real? Science, v. 197, pp. 983–986.
Olsen, P.E., and Sues, H.D., 1986, Correlation of continental Late
Triassic and Early Jurassic sediments, and patterns of the TriassicJurassic tetrapod transition. In: K. Padian (Ed.), The Beginning
of the Age of Dinosaurs. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp. 321–351.
Olsen, P.E., Kent, D.V., and Whiteside, J.H., 2011, Implications of
the Newark Supergroup-based astrochronology and geomagnetic
polarity time scale (Newark-APTS) for the tempo and mode of
the early diversification of the Dinosauria. Earth and
Environmental Science Transactions of the Royal Society of
Edinburgh, v. 101, pp. 201–229.
Owen, R., 1855, Description of the cranium of a labyrinthodont reptile,
Brachyops laticeps, from Mangli, central India. Quarterly Journal
of the Geological Society of London, v. 11, pp. 37–39.
Padian, K., and Sues, H.D., 2015, The age of the transformation: the
Triassic period and the rise of today’s land vertebrate fauna. In:
Dial, K.P., Shubin, N., and Brainerd, E.L. (Eds.), Great
Transformations in Vertebrate Evolution. University of Chicago
Press, pp. 351–374.
Parmar, V., Prasad, G.V.R. and Kumar, D., 2013, The first
multituberculate mammal from India. Naturwissenschaften,
v. 100, pp. 515-523.
Pascoe, E.H., 1975, A Manual of the Geology of India and Burma.
Government of India Press, Calcutta, v.II, p. 909–1016.
Pickford, M., 1995, Karoo Supergroup palaeontology of Namibia and
brief description of a thecodont from Omingonde. Palaeontologia
Africana, v. 32, pp. 51–66.
Pol, D., Garrido, A., and Cerda, I. A., 2011, A new sauropodomorph
dinosaur from the Early Jurassic of Patagonia and the origin and
evolution of the sauropod-type sacrum. Plos One, v. 26. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0014572
Prasad, G.V.R., Singh, K.P.V., Goswami, A., and Sudan, C.S., 2008,
Hybodont shark teeth from continental Upper Triassic deposits
of India. In: Arratia, G., Schultze, H.P., and Wilson, M.V.H., (Eds),
Mesozoic Fishes 4: Homology and Phylogeny. Germany, Verlag
Dr. Friedrich Pfeil, p.413–432.
Preto, N., Kustatscher, E., and Wignall, P.B., 2010, Triassic climates
— state of the art and perspectives. Palaeogeography,
Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, v. 290, pp. 1–10.
Rakshit, N., Bhat, M.S., Ray, S., and Datta, P.M., 2018, First report
March 2020

459
of dinosaurian claws from the Late Triassic of India. Palaeoworld,
v. 27, pp. 179–187.
Ray, S., 1999, Permian reptilian fauna from the Kundaram Formation,
Pranhita-Godavari valley, India. Journal of African Earth Sciences,
v. 29, pp. 211–218.
Ray, S., 2000, Endothiodont dicynodonts from the Late Permian
Kundaram Formation of India. Palaeontology, v. 43, pp. 375–
404.
Ray, S., 2001, Small Permian dicynodonts from India. Paleontological
Research, v. 5, pp. 177–191.
Ray, S., 2005, Lystrosaurus (Therapsida, Dicynodontia) from India:
Taxonomy, relative growth and cranial dimorphism. Journal of
Systematic Palaeontology, v. 3, pp. 203–221.
Ray, S., 2006, Functional and evolutionary aspects of the postcranial
anatomy of dicynodonts. Palaeontology, v. 49, pp. 1263–1286.
Ray, S., 2015, A new Late Triassic traversodontid cynodont
(Therapsida, Eucynodontia) from India. Journal of Vertebrate
Palaeontology, v.35. doi: 10.1080/02724634.2014.930472
Ray, S., and Bandyopadhyay, S., 2003, Late Permian vertebrate
community of the Pranhita-Godavari valley, India. Journal of
Asian Earth Sciences, v. 21, pp. 643–654.
Ray, S., Bhat, M.S., Mukherjee, D., and Datta, P.M., 2016, Vertebrate
fauna from the Late Triassic Tiki Formation of India: new finds
and their biostratigraphic implications. The Palaeobotanist, v. 65,
pp. 47–59.
Ray, S., Bhat, M.S., and Datta, P.M., 2019, First record of varied
archosauriforms from the Upper Triassic of India based on isolated
teeth, and their biostratigraphic implications. Historical Biology,
doi: 10.1080/08912963.2019.1609957
Remes, K., 2007, A second Gondwanan diplodocid dinosaur from
the Upper Jurassic Tendaguru Beds of Tanzania, East Africa.
Palaeontology, v. 50, pp. 653–667.
Robinson, P.L., 1970, The Indian Gondwana formations – a review.
First International symposium on Gondwana Stratigraphy, IUGS,
South America, p. 201–268.
Robinson, P.L., 1973, Palaeoclimatology and continental drift. In:
D. H. Tarling and S.K. Runcorn (Eds.). Academic Press, London,
pp. 451-476.
Rogers, R.R., Swisher III, C.C., Sereno, P.C., Monetta, A.M., Forster,
C.A. and Martínez, R.N., 1993, The Ischigualasto tetrapod
assemblage (Late Triassic, Argentina) and 40Ar/39Ar Dating of
dinosaur origins. Science, v. 260, pp. 794–797.
Röhl, H.J., Schmid-Rçhl, A., furrer, H., Frimmel, A., Oschmann, W.,
and Schwark, L., 2001, Microfacies, geochemistry and
palaeoecology of the Middle Triassic Grenzbitumenzone from
Monte San Giorgo (Canton Ticino, Switzerland). Geol. Insubr.,
v. 6, pp. 1–13.
Romer, A.S., 1966, Vertebrate Palaeontology. Third edition, Chicago
University Press, Chicago.
Roopnarine, P.D., 2018, Ecological persistence, incumbency and
reorganization in the Karoo Basin during the Permian-Triassic
transition. Earth-Science Reviews, v. 189, pp. 244–263.
Rowe, T.B., 1988, Definition, diagnosis, and origin of Mammalia.
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, v. 8, pp. 241–264.
RoyChowdhury, T.K., 1965, A new metoposaurid amphibian from
the Maleri Formation, India. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society London, v. B250, pp. 1–52.
RoyChowdhury, T. K., 1970, Two new dicynodonts from Triassic
Yerrapalli Formation of central India. Palaeontology, v. 13 (1),
pp. 132-144.
Rubidge, B.S. (Ed), 1995, Biostratigraphy of the Beaufort Group.
South African Commission Stratigraphy, Biostratigraphic Series,
v.1, p.l”45.
Rubidge, B. S., 2015, Reuniting lost continents - fossil reptiles from
Episodes Vol. 43, no. 1

the ancient Karoo and their wanderlust. 27th DuToit Memorial
Lecture, South African Journal of Geology, v. 108, pp. 135–172.
Rudra, D.K., 1982, Upper Gondwana stratigraphy and sedimentation
in the Pranhita-Godavari valley, India. Quarterly Journal of
Geological, Mining and Metallurgical Society of India, v. 54, pp.
56–79.
Rudra, D.K., and Maulik, P.K., 1994, Lower Jurassic Kota Limestone
of India. In: Gierlowski-Kordesch, E. and Kelts, K. (Eds), Global
Geological Record of Lake Basins, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, v. 1, pp. 185–191.
Sahney, S., and Benton, M.J., 2008, Recovery from the most profound
mass extinction of all time. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London, v. B275, pp. 759–765.
Sarkar S., 1988., Petrology of caliche-derived peloidal cacirudite/
calcarenite in the Late Triassic Maleri Formation of the PranhitaGodavari valley, south India. Sedimentary Geology, v. 55, pp.
263–282.
Satsangi, P.P., 1987, The vertebrate faunas of the Permian and Lower
Triassic sequence of India. In: Mesozoic Gondwana vertebrates,
Geological Survey of India Special Publication, v.11, p.165–178.
Schoch, R.R., Nesbitt, S., Müller, J., Lucas, S.G., and Boy, J.A., 2010,
The reptile assemblage from the Moenkopi Formation (Middle
Triassic) of New Mexico. Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und
Paläontologie - Abhandlungen, v. 255, pp. 345–369.
Schultz, C.L., Langer, M.C., and Montefeltro, F.C., 2016, A new
rhynchosaur from south Brazil (Santa Maria Formation) and
rhynchosaur diversity patterns across the Middle-Late Triassic
boundary. Paläontologische Zeitschrift, v. 90, pp. 593–609.
Sengupta, D.P., 2002, Indian metoposaurid amphibians revised.
Paleontological Research, v. 6, pp. 41–65.
Sengupta, S.M., 1970, Gondwana sedimentation around Bheemaram
(Bhimaram), Pranhita-Godavari Valley, India. Journal of
Sedimentary Petrology, v. 40, pp. 140 –170.
Sengupta, S., Sengupta, D.P., and Bandyopadhyay, S., 2016,
Stratigraphy of the Upper Gondwana formations around Sohagpur:
Western part of the Satpura Gondwana Basin, Central India.
Journal Geological Society of India, v. 87, pp. 503–519.
Sengupta, S., Ezcurra, M.D., and Bandyopadhyay, S., 2017, A new
horned and long-necked herbivorous stem-archosaur from the
Middle Triassic of India. Scientific Reports, v. 7 (8366), p. 1–9.
Sennikov, A.G., 1996, Evolution of the Permian and Triassic tetrapod
communities of Eastern Europe. Palaeogeography,
Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, v. 120 (3–4), pp. 331–351.
Shishkin, M.A., Rubidge, B.S., and Kitching, J.W., 1996, A new
lydekkerinid (Amphibia, Temnospondyli) from the Lower Triassic
of South Africa: implications for evolution of the early
capitosauroid cranial pattern. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London, v. B351, pp. 1635–1659.
Sidor, C.A., Steyer, J.S., and Hammer, W.R., 2014, A new capitosaurid
temnospondyl from the Middle Triassic Upper Fremouw
Formation of Antarctica. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, v.
34, pp. 539–548.
Smith, R.M.H., 2000, Sedimentology and taphonomy of Late Permian
vertebrate fossil localities in southwestern Madagascar.
Palaeontologia Africana, v. 36, pp. 25–41.
Smith, R.M.H., and Ward, P.D., 2001, Pattern of vertebrate extinctions
across an event bed at the Permian-Triassic boundary in the Karoo
Basin of South Africa. Geology, v. 29, pp. 1147–1150.
Smith, R.M.H., Rubidge, B., and van der Wal, M., 2012, Therapsid
biodiversity patterns and paleoenvironments of the Karoo Basin,
South Africa. In: Chinsamy-Turan, A. (Ed.), Forerunners of
Mammals. Indiana University Press, pp. 31–62.
Sookias, R.B., Sullivan, C., Liu, J., and Butler, R.J., 2014, Systematics
of putative euparkeriids (Diapsida, Archosauriformes) from the

460
Triassic of China. PeerJ, v. 2, doi: 10.7717/peerj.658.
Sues, H.D., and Fraser, N.C., 2010, Triassic Life on Land: The Great
Transition. Columbia University Press, New York, 236 pp.
Sues, H.D., Shubin, N.H., and Olsen, P.E., 1994, A new sphenodontian
(Lepidosauria: Rhynchocephalia) from the Mccoy Brook
Formation (Lower Jurassic) of Nova Scotia, Canada. Journal of
Vertebrate Paleontology, v. 14, pp. 327–340.
Tanner, H.T., 2018, The Late Triassic World, Topics in Geobiology
46. Springer, 805 p.
Tennant, J.P., Mannion, P.D., and Upchurch, P., 2016, Sea level
regulated tetrapod diversity dynamics through the Jurassic/
Cretaceous interval. Nature Communication, v. 712737. doi:
10.1038 /ncomms12737
Tennant, J.P., Mannion, P.D., Upchurch, P., Sutton, M.D., and Price,
G.D., 2017, Biotic and environmental dynamics through the Late
Jurassic–Early Cretaceous transition: evidence for protracted
faunal and ecological turnover. Biological Reviews, v. 92, pp.
776–814.
Tripathi, C., 1962 Rhinesuchus wadiai sp. nov., a new labyrinthodont
from Vindhya Pradesh. Records Geological Survey of India, v.
89, pp. 399–406.
Tripathi, C., and Satsangi, P.P., 1963, Lystrosaurus fauna of the
Panchet series of the Raniganj coalfield. Memoirs of the
Geological Survey of India, New series, v. 37, pp. 1–65.
Tucker, M.E., and Benton, M.J., 1982, Triassic environments, climates
and reptile evolution. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology,
Palaeoecology, v. 40, pp. 361–379.

Twitchett, R.J., 2007, The Lilliput effect in the aftermath of the endPermian extinction event. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology,
Palaeoecology, v. 252, pp. 132–144.
Veevers, J.J., and Tewari, R.C., 1995, Gondwana Master Basin of
peninsular India between Tethys and interior of the Gondwana
provinces of Pangea. Geological Society of America, Memoir, v.
187, pp. 1–72.
Warren, A., 2012, The South African stereospondyl Microposaurus
from the Middle Triassic of the Sydney Basin, Australia. Journal
of Vertebrate Paleontology, v. 32, pp. 538–544.
Warren, A., Damiani, R., and Sengupta, D.P., 2009, Unique
stereospondyl mandibles from the early Triassic Panchet
Formation of India and the Arcadia Formation of Australia.
Special Papers in Palaeontology, v. 1, pp. 161–173.
Whiteside, J.H., Olsen, P.E., Eglinton, T., Brookfield, M.E., and
Sambrotto, R.N., 2010, Compound-specific carbon isotopes from
Earth’s largest flood basalt eruptions directly linked to the endTriassic mass extinction. Proceedings of the National academy
of Sciences of the United States of America, v. 107, pp. 6721–
6725.
Woodward, A.S., 1905, Permo-Carboniferous vertebrates from
Kashmir. Palaeontologia lndica New Series, v. 3, pp. 1–13.
Yates, A.M., 2003, A definite prosauropod dinosaur from the Lower
Elliot Formation (Norian: Upper Triassic) of South Africa.
Palaeontologia Africana, v. 39, pp. 63–68.
Zhang, W., Chen, P. J., and Palmer, A.R., 2003, Biostratigraphy of
China. Elsevier Press, 599 p.

Saswati Bandyopadhyay is the Professor
and former Head of the Geological Studies
Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata.
She has specialized mainly in Vertebrate
Palaeontology including origin, evolution,
functional morphology and systematic study
of the Mesozoic reptiles, their taphonomy
and bone histology. She has worked on the
Indian dinosaurs including the Jurassic
sauropod Barapasaurus tagorei and
discovered a new horned reptile,
Shringasaurus indicus, from the Middle
Triassic mudstone of the Satpura Gondwana
Basin, India. Besides she has also worked
on Indian Gondwana geology including
stratigraphy and depositional environment,
biochronology and palaeoclimatology.

Sanghamitra Ray is a Professor at the
Department of Geology and Geophysics,
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur,
India. Her research is focused on various
aspects of the Permo-Triassic Gondwana
vertebrates, mainly involving deduction of
their palaeobiology based on functional
morphology and bone histology. During the
last few years, she has been actively involved
in deciphering the (i), Late Triassic
vertebrate faunal assemblages of India and
their palaeobiological aspects including
mode of life, (ii), various trace fossils and
their producers, and (iii) reconstruction of
the Triassic palaeo-ecosystem of India.

March 2020

