[Papers in Palaeontology, Vol. 3, Part 4, 2017, pp. 513–545]

THE CRANIAL MORPHOLOGY, PHYLOGENETIC
POSITION AND BIOGEOGRAPHY OF THE UPPER
PERMIAN DICYNODONT COMPSODON HELMOEDI
VAN HOEPEN (THERAPSIDA, ANOMODONTIA)
by KENNETH D. ANGIELCZYK 1 and CHRISTIAN F. KAMMERER 2
1

Integrative Research Center, Field Museum of Natural History, 1400 South Lake Shore Drive, Chicago, IL 60605, USA; kangielczyk@fieldmuseum.org
Museum f€
ur Naturkunde, Leibniz-Institut f€
ur Evolutions- und Biodiversit€atsforschung, Invalidenstraße 43, Berlin, 10115, Germany;
christian.kammerer@mfn-berlin.de
2

Typescript received 4 May 2017; accepted in revised form 10 July 2017

Abstract: Compsodon helmoedi is an obscure dicynodont
originally described based on a single specimen from the
upper Permian of the Karoo Basin. The discovery of three
new specimens of Compsodon from the Luangwa Basin of
Zambia and two additional specimens from South African
museum collections facilitates a reassessment of its cranial
morphology and phylogenetic position. Compsodon is diagnosed by an autapomorphic secondary palate morphology:
medial depression at anterior end of premaxillary secondary
palate; medial anterior palatal ridges absent; lateral anterior
palatal ridges prominent and extend to posterior end of
secondary palate; Y-shaped anterior end of posterior median palatal ridge; embayment of palatal rim anterior to
caniniform process divided into two depressions by a posteromedially-trending ridge. Other important characters
include the presence of maxillary ‘postcanines’ and a postcaniniform keel; long interpterygoid vacuity; palatine pad
smooth and pierced by a foramen; pineal foramen flanked

by swollen eminences of parietals; parietals fused and narrowly exposed between broad postorbitals on dorsal surface
of skull; and pocket-like depression on lateral surface of
maxilla. Phylogenetic analysis demonstrates that Compsodon
is a member of Emydopoidea, but underscores major outstanding problems in our understanding of Permian dicynodont phylogeny that require further attention. The cranial
morphology of Compsodon converges on that of cryptodonts like Tropidostoma, and as such represents a unique
emydopoid morphotype. The stratigraphic range of Compsodon probably spans the upper Cistecephalus and lower
Daptocephalus assemblage zones, and its presence in South
Africa and Zambia reinforces a pattern of small Permian
dicynodonts with wide geographical ranges in southern
Gondwana.

E M Y D O P O I D E A (sensu Kammerer et al. 2015a) is one of
the most interesting of the major clades of dicynodont
therapsids, and has a long history of study beginning with
Owen’s (1876) description of species now contained in
the genera Emydops and Cistecephalus. Consisting of
mostly small-bodied species, they are morphologically disparate (Ruta et al. 2013) including species with unusually
mammal-like pelvis and hindlimb morphologies (Cox
1959; King 1985) as well as a radiation of highly specialized fossorial species (Cox 1972; Keyser 1973; Cluver
1974a, 1978; Nasterlack et al. 2012; Laaß 2015; Kammerer
et al. 2016). Emydopoids also were geographically widespread, occurring in most major fossiliferous PermoTriassic basins in Gondwana (Fr€
obisch 2009), and they
are one of only two major clades of dicynodonts to survive the Permo-Triassic mass extinction (Cluver 1974b;

Hotton 1974; Fr€
obisch 2007; Fr€
obisch et al. 2010). Within
the current framework of dicynodont taxonomy, Emydopoidea is less diverse than the two primary bidentalian
higher taxa (Cryptodontia and Dicynodontoidea). However, as broad-scale taxonomic revisions of dicynodonts
have proceeded, rigorous reconsideration of previously
marginal, poorly known dicynodonts has become easier
(e.g. Angielczyk & Rubidge 2013; Angielczyk et al. 2016).
Emydopoidea is no exception to this trend, leading to a
slow but continuous increase in the clade’s species richness in recent years (Fr€
obisch & Reisz 2008; Fr€
obisch
et al. 2010; Kammerer et al. 2015a, 2016).
Compsodon helmoedi numbers among the enigmatic
dicynodont species that still require reassessment in a
modern taxonomic and phylogenetic framework. First
described by South African palaeontologist E. C. N. van

© The Palaeontological Association

Key words: Synapsida, Therapsida, Anomodontia, Dicynodontia, Karoo Basin, Luangwa Basin.

doi: 10.1002/spp2.1087

513

PAPERS IN PALAEONTOLOGY, VOLUME 3

Hoepen in 1934, C. helmoedi played an important role in
van Hoepen’s (1934) foresightful phylogeny of dicynodonts, although he considered it most closely related to
the cryptodont Tropidostoma. Toerien (1954) proposed
emydopoid affinities for C. helmoedi, but Cluver & King
(1983) and King (1988) listed it as incertae sedis in their
taxonomies of dicynodonts. Most recently, Angielczyk
et al. (2014a; also see Kammerer et al. 2015a) revived the
hypothesis of C. helmoedi as an emydopoid, based on
newly collected specimens from the Luangwa Basin of
Zambia, which were only partially prepared at the time.
Here we present a detailed description of the cranial
morphology of C. helmoedi, based on a combination of
new and historic specimens from South Africa and Zambia, and confirm that it is a distinct, valid taxon. We also
demonstrate that it is an emydopoid, as proposed by Toerien (1954), and discuss its implications for biostratigraphy, biogeography, and morphological disparity within
Emydopoidea.

resulting in an isotropic voxel size of 87.04 lm. CT scan
data are available on request from the NHCC or the Field
Museum of Natural History.

SYSTEMATIC PALAEONTOLOGY
ANOMODONTIA Owen, 1860
DICYNODONTIA Owen, 1860
THEROCHELONIA Seeley, 1894
EMYDOPOIDEA van Hoepen, 1934
Genus COMPSODON van Hoepen, 1934

Type species. Compsodon helmoedi van Hoepen, 1934
Diagnosis. As for the type and only species.

Compsodon helmoedi van Hoepen, 1934

Institutional abbreviations. CGS, Council for Geoscience, Pretoria, South Africa; NHCC, National Heritage Conservation Commission, Lusaka, Zambia; NMQR, National Museum,
Bloemfontein, South Africa; PIN, Paleontological Institute of the
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia; RC, Rubidge
Collection, Graaff-Reinet, South Africa; SAM, Iziko Museums of
South Africa, Cape Town, South Africa; TSK, T. S. Kemp Collection, Natural History Museum, London, UK.

METHOD
We referred to x-ray lCT data for two specimens, NHCC
LB14 (Compsodon helmoedi) and NHCC LB631 (Oudenodon bainii), in the course of this study. The data for
both specimens were acquired at the University of Chicago PaleoCT facility using a GE v|tome|x s 240 scanner.
Data for NHCC LB14 were acquired using an acceleration
voltage of 200 kV, an e-beam current of 210 lA, and a
0.5 mm tin filter. A total of 2694 images were produced,
resulting in an isotropic voxel size of 64.9 lm. The scan
of NHCC LB631 covers only the posterior two-thirds of
the specimen. Data were acquired using an acceleration
voltage of 220 kV, and e-beam current of 260 lA, and a
0.5 mm tin filter. A total of 2021 images were produced,

Figures 1–5

1983 Tropidostoma microtrema (partim) Brink & Keyser,
J212A231B1

Holotype. NMQR 1460, a nearly complete but laterally
compressed skull (Fig. 1).
Referred material. NHCC LB13, a skull missing the postorbital
bars and zygomatic arches (Fig. 3); NHCC LB14, a complete and
undistorted skull (Fig. 2); NHCC LB116, a skull missing the right
postorbital bar and zygomatic arch (Fig. 4); RC 641, a partially
prepared skull with damaged zygomatic arches (Fig. 5A, B); RC
736, a damaged skull and partial mandible (Fig. 5C, D).

Revised diagnosis. A large emydopoid dicynodont (maximum known basal skull length about 112 mm) distinguished by the following autapomorphic morphology of
the secondary palate: medial depression at the anterior
end of the premaxillary secondary palate; medial anterior
palatal ridges absent, but lateral anterior palatal ridges
prominent and extend to posterior end of secondary
palate; Y-shaped anterior end of the posterior median
palatal ridge; embayment of the palatal rim anterior to
the caniniform process divided into two depressions by a

Compsodon helmoedi van Hoepen 1934, holotype NMQR 1460. Photographs (A, C, E, G) and interpretive drawings (B, D, F,
H) in right lateral (A, B), dorsal (C, D), ventral (E, F), and posterior (G, H) views. I, closeup of left ‘postcanine’ in labial view. Abbreviations: ap, anterior plate; bo, basioccipital; cp, cultriform process; ec, ectopterygoid; eo, exoccipital; epi, epipterygoid; f, fossa; fr,
frontal; ic, internal carotid canal; ip, interparietal; ipv, interpterygoid vacuity; ju, jugal; la, lacrimal; mx, maxilla; na, nasal; pa, parietal;
pbs, parabasisphenoid; pc, ‘postcanine’ tooth; pe, periotic; pf, postfrontal; pif, pineal foramen; pl, palatine; plf, palatine foramen; pm,
premaxilla; po, postorbital; pp, preparietal; pr, prefrontal; pt, pterygoid; ptf, posttemporal fenestra; qd, quadrate; qj, quadratojugal;
smx, septomaxilla; so, supraoccipital; sq, squamosal; tb, tabular. Upper scale bar (A–H) represents 2 cm; lower scale bar (I) represents
1 mm.

FIG. 1.

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

514

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

515

ANGIELCZYK & KAMMERER: REDESCRIPTION OF COMPSODON

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

PAPERS IN PALAEONTOLOGY, VOLUME 3
516

posteromedially-trending ridge. In addition, the following
combination of primitive and derived characters is diagnostic for the species: diamond-shaped nasal boss with
continuous posterior margin; prefrontal boss absent; orbital margins slightly raised above level of skull roof;
depressions near posterior end of dorsal surface of frontal
give postfrontals a raised appearance; pineal foramen
flanked laterally by swollen ‘lip’-like eminences of parietals; parietals fused and narrowly exposed between broad
postorbitals on dorsal surface of temporal bar; interparietal does not contribute to dorsal surface of temporal
bar; pocket-like depression on lateral surface of maxilla
between external naris, caniniform process, and anterior
orbital margin; caniniform process short; caniniform
tusks present; postcaniniform keel present; small number
of maxillary ‘postcanines’ present posterior to tusk; maxillary ‘postcanine’ crowns conical with pointed tips and
no serrations; palatine pad lacks rugosity and is pierced
by a foramen near its medial margin; groove on ventral
surface of midventral vomerine plate; anterior pterygoid
rami with straight lateral edges; interpterygoid vacuity
long (c. 22% of basal skull length), narrow; crista oesophagea tall, blade-like with shallow groove on anterior
edge; parabasisphenoid with raised eminence between
crista oesophagea and basitubera; intertuberal ridge
absent; temporal and zygomatic rami of squamosal meet
at obtuse angle in posterior view; zygomatic and quadrate
rami have notched lateral profile in posterior view.

517

Assemblage Zone (AZ) of Viglietti et al. (2016), which is Lopingian in age.
The two other specimens of C. helmoedi from the Karoo
Basin, RC 641 and RC 736, were collected at Ferndale (GraaffReinet District) and Boskraal (Graaff-Reinet District), respectively (Kammerer et al. 2015a). Strata exposed on the environs
of the farm Ferndale exclusively represent the Daptocephalus AZ
of Viglietti et al. (2016) (Kammerer et al. 2015b), whereas
Boskraal includes parts of the upper Cistecephalus AZ as well as
the lower Daptocephalus AZ. Lithostratigraphically, strata on
both farms correspond to the Balfour Formation.
NHCC LB13 and LB14 were collected near the southern border of North Luangwa National Park (Northern Province, Zambia), about 40 m apart from one another in parallel erosional
gullies leading to a seasonal tributary of the Musina River, which
in turn is a tributary of the Luangwa River. NHCC LB116 was
collected approximately 3.6 km north-east of these localities,
along the banks of a seasonal tributary of the Mulondoshi River
(another tributary of the Luangwa River). Detailed locality information is available from the NHCC or KDA. These localities are
located in the Mid-Luangwa Basin of Barbolini et al. (2016),
and all expose strata of the Upper Madumabisa Mudstone Formation. Angielczyk et al. (2014a) correlated the tetrapod assemblage of the Upper Madumabisa Mudstone with the
Cistecephalus AZ of South Africa. Taking the revised biostratigraphy of Viglietti et al. (2016) into account, it is probable that the
Upper Madumabisa Mudstone overlaps parts of the Cistecephalus and Daptocephalus AZs.

Description
Occurrence. Van Hoepen (1934) stated that NMQR 1460 was
collected in a friable, calcareous, clayey, green sandstone near
Mazelspoort, about 15 miles (sic) from Bloemfontein. He suggested that the rocks were referable to the Cistecephalus zone
(sensu Watson 1914). Toerien (1954, p. 131) provided more
detailed information: ‘a donga [erosional gully] running into the
Modder River on the eastern side of the Modder River Bridge
on the farm Kranskraal [Bloemfontein District], on the Bloemfontein–Verkeerdevlei road, beyond Mocke’s dam.’ Haughton &
Brink (1954) and King (1988) repeated van Hoepen’s original
locality of Mazelspoort. Kitching (1977) listed the type of C. helmoedi in his entry for Kranskraal, and stated that the stratigraphic section on the farm is highly attenuated with the rocks
exposed referable to his Cistecephalus and/or Daptocephalus
zones. In current terms, this would correspond to the Normandien Formation, and would represent the lower Daptocephalus

Although relatively large compared to most emydopoids,
Compsodon is a small dicynodont. The best preserved specimens (NMQR 1460, NHCC LB13, NHCC LB14, NHCC
LB116) have basal skull lengths that range from 95.7 to
111.6 mm. Angielczyk et al. (2014a) provided a brief description of C. helmoedi, but the focus of that work was primarily
to provide justification for the assignment of NHCC LB13 and
LB14 to the species. Here we present a complete redescription
of the species.
The premaxillae (Figs 1–4) are fused, and the resulting median element forms the anterior portion of the snout. An ascending process of the premaxilla extends between the nasals and
tapers to a rounded point, but it does not closely approach the
nasofrontal suture. There is no longitudinal ridge on the anterior
surface of the premaxilla, but a number of small nutritive

Compsodon helmoedi van Hoepen 1934, referred specimen NHCC LB14. Photographs (A, C, E, G) and interpretive drawings
(B, D, F, H) in right lateral (A, B), dorsal (C, D), ventral (E, F), and posterior (G, H) views. Abbreviations: bo, basioccipital; ec,
ectopterygoid; eo, exoccipital; epi, epipterygoid; f, fossa; fo, fenestra ovalis; fr, frontal; ic, internal carotid canal; ip, interparietal; ipv,
interpterygoid vacuity; jf, jugular foramen; ju, jugal; la, lacrimal; lf, lacrimal foramen; lpf, lateral palatal foramen; mx, maxilla; na,
nasal; nc, ‘nutrient channel’; pa, parietal; pbs, parabasisphenoid; pc, ‘postcanine’ tooth; pe, periotic; pf, postfrontal; pif, pineal foramen;
pl, palatine; plf, palatine foramen; pm, premaxilla; po, postorbital; pp, preparietal; pr, prefrontal; pt, pterygoid; ptf, posttemporal fenestra; qd, quadrate; qj, quadratojugal; smx, septomaxilla; so, supraoccipital; sq, squamosal; st, stapes; tb, tabular; vo, vomer. Scale bar
represents 2 cm.

FIG. 2.

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ANGIELCZYK & KAMMERER: REDESCRIPTION OF COMPSODON

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

PAPERS IN PALAEONTOLOGY, VOLUME 3
518

foramina are visible in NHCC LB14 (Fig. 4E), which presumably
supplied the keratinous beak in this area. The premaxilla also
forms the anterior margin of the external naris, and it meets the
septomaxilla along an anteriorly convex suture on the floor of
the naris. A point contact between the premaxilla and maxilla is
present on the palatal rim, close to the midpoint of the ventral
edge of the naris.
On the ventral surface of the skull, the premaxilla forms the
anteromedial portion of the secondary palate. Many of the
details of the secondary palate of NMQR 1460 are obscured due
to lateral compression and somewhat rough preparation
(Fig. 1E), but the area is extremely well preserved in NHCC
LB13, LB14, and LB116 (Figs 2E, 3E, 4D). Anterior median palatal ridges are absent. Instead, the anterior portion of the secondary palate bears a deep, rounded depression along its
midline. The depression is flanked by a pair of well-developed
lateral anterior palatal ridges that parallel the maxilla–premaxilla
suture and extend posteriorly to the level of the anterior edge of
the choana. A posterior median palatal ridge also is present. It is
tallest posteriorly and its anterior end expands into a flattened
Y-shaped platform whose surface merges smoothly with the
anterior median depression. The shape of this platform is most
similar to that of the pylaecephalid Eosimops (Angielczyk &
Rubidge 2013) although it differs in lacking the anterior median
palatal ridges seen in the latter taxon. Posterior to the flattened,
expanded area, a pair of rounded, groove-like depressions is
located between the posterior median ridge and the lateral anterior ridges. The ventral surface of the posterior median ridge
slightly overhangs its lateral walls, forming a narrow, deeply
incised channel on each side between the ridge and the larger
depression lateral to it. The channel appears to communicate
with a small foramen located between the flattened, expanded
area of the median ridge and the lateral anterior palatal ridge
(best seen on the left side of NHCC LB14). Comparable channels have been described in Brachyprosopus, Myosaurus and Lystrosaurus (Cluver 1971, 1974b; Angielczyk et al. 2016) with the
morphology in Compsodon showing the most similarity to that
reported in Myosaurus, although Compsodon lacks the distinct
ridges that bound the groove laterally in that taxon. The vomer
contacts the premaxilla along an interdigitated suture at the back
of the posterior median palatal ridge, and the palatine contacts
the premaxilla near the anterior edge of the choana. Premaxillary
teeth are absent in Compsodon.
The septomaxilla is best preserved in the three Zambian specimens, especially NHCC LB14 (Fig. 4E). The base of the septomaxilla is a broad, rounded plate that rests upon the
premaxilla and maxilla. This plate is extremely thin and it forms
about half the external surface of the floor of the external naris.

519

It also makes a small contribution to the facial surface of the
skull just above the palatal rim. A short, plate-like intranarial
process arises from the posteromedial corner of the base and
extends dorsally to contact the nasal. The intranarial process
forms the medial wall of the large, round septomaxillary foramen; the maxilla contributes to the lateral wall of the foramen.
A septomaxillary canal appears to be present medial to the intranarial process (best seen in NHCC LB13 and LB14). A similar
septomaxillary canal has been reported in other emydopoids
(Cox 1959; Keyser 1973; Fourie 1993) although the septomaxilla
of Compsodon lacks the other small foramina noted in Dicynodontoides by Cox (1959).
The maxillae contribute to the facial and palatal portions of
the skull. On the facial surface (Figs 1B, 2B, 3B, 4A) the maxilla
forms parts of the posterior and ventral margins of the external
naris and contacts the septomaxilla. It also has an anterior point
contact with the premaxilla along the palatal rim, which contrasts with the more extensive, approximately vertical premaxilla–maxilla facial suture found in many dicynodonts, often
within an associated groove that extends ventrally from the naris
(e.g. Keyser 1975). Similar to the case in Digalodon (Kammerer
et al. 2015a), the palatal rim anterior to the caniniform process
(formed by contributions from the maxilla and premaxilla) in
Compsodon is comparatively long for an emydopoid (best seen
in NHCC LB14 and NMQR 1460, which have the most completely preserved snouts). The morphology of the palatal rim in
Compsodon differs from that in Digalodon, however, by being
gently convex dorsally instead of straight. Behind the naris, a
dorsal process of the maxilla contacts the nasal. In the van Hoepen (1934) figures of the holotype, this process also contacts the
lacrimal, but not the prefrontal, and at some point in its history
lines were drawn onto the specimen to reflect this, which now
obscure the underlying sutural configuration. The sutures in this
area are visible in NHCC LB14 and LB116, and they confirm
that the facial portion of the lacrimal separated the maxilla from
the prefrontal. Angielczyk et al. (2014a) noted that a distinctive
pocket-like depression was present on the lateral surface of the
maxilla, between the external naris, caniniform process, and
anterior orbital margin. This depression has a raised posterior
and ventral rim, but anteriorly and dorsally it grades smoothly
into the surrounding surface of the bone. The pocket is clearly
seen in all three Zambian specimens and in the holotype,
although rough preparation of the latter specimen has resulted
in the raised rim being less prominent. Posteriorly, the facial
portion of the maxilla tapers into a short zygomatic process that
contacts the jugal and squamosal.
The caniniform process is quite short, barely extending past
the level of the palatal rim. Its anterior edge merges smoothly

Compsodon helmoedi van Hoepen 1934, referred specimen NHCC LB13. Photographs (A, C, E, G) and interpretive drawings
(B, D, F, H) in left lateral (A, B), dorsal (C, D), ventral (E, F), and posterior (G, H) views. Abbreviations: bo, basioccipital; cp, cultriform process; ec, ectopterygoid; eo, exoccipital; epi, epipterygoid; f, fossa; fa, facet; fo, fenestra ovalis; fr, frontal; hy, hyoid element; ic,
internal carotid canal; ip, interparietal; jf, jugular foramen; ju, jugal; la, lacrimal; lf, lacrimal foramen; lpf, lateral palatal foramen; mx,
maxilla; na, nasal; nc, ‘nutrient channel’; pa, parietal; pbs, parabasisphenoid; pc, ‘postcanine’ tooth; pe, periotic; pf, postfrontal; pif,
pineal foramen; pl, palatine; plf, palatine foramen; pm, premaxilla; po, postorbital; pp, preparietal; pr, prefrontal; pt, pterygoid; ptf,
posttemporal fenestra; qd, quadrate; qj, quadratojugal; smx, septomaxilla; so, supraoccipital; sq, squamosal; VII, foramen for facial
nerve; vo, vomer. Scale bar represents 2 cm.
FIG. 3.

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ANGIELCZYK & KAMMERER: REDESCRIPTION OF COMPSODON

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

PAPERS IN PALAEONTOLOGY, VOLUME 3
520

with the palatal rim; a notch in the rim similar to that in Eodicynodon and Colobodectes (Rubidge 1990; Angielczyk & Rubidge
2009) is absent, and the anterior edge of the caniniform process
is not offset as in pylaecephalids (e.g. Cluver & King 1983;
Angielczyk & Rubidge 2013). An embayment is present on the
medial surface of the palatal rim anterior to the caniniform process (see below) and a postcaniniform keel is present posterior
to the caniniform process (see Angielczyk (2001) for a discussion
of the distinction between this character state and the postcaniniform crest of cryptodonts). A strong lateral caniniform
buttress is absent. Angielczyk et al. (2005) described the presence
of a distinctive small foramen on the posterior surface of the
caniniform process in Emydops, which was larger than and separated from the vascular foramina associated with the keratinous
beak. Fr€
obisch & Reisz (2008) further refined this observation by
noting that the foramen is present in E. arctatus but not in
E. oweni. A foramen in this precise position is absent in Compsodon. However, in all three Zambian specimens and the holotype a very similar foramen is present in a slightly more anterior
position, such that it is on the lateral surface of the face just
below the base of the zygomatic process of the maxilla and at
about the level of the posterior edge of the tusk (Fig. 2B). The
anterior, posterior and dorsal edges of the foramen form a
slightly raised rim and, as in Emydops, the foramen is larger than
the vascular foramina associated with the beak. Given its generally similar position and morphology, we posit that this foramen
is homologous with that of Emydops, although its function is
uncertain.
The palatal portion of the maxilla forms the lateral edge of
the secondary palate and much of the rim of the palate (Figs 1F,
2F, 3F, 4D). The maxilla contacts the premaxilla medially along
a straight suture that parallels the lateral anterior palatal ridge.
Posteriorly, the maxilla contacts the palatine and the ectopterygoid. A strong embayment of the medial surface of the palatal
rim is present anterior to the caniniform process, a character
that is typical of emydopoids (see review in Kammerer & Angielczyk 2009). In contrast to the case in other emydopoids, however, a strong posteromedially-directed ridge divides the
embayment into anterior and posterior depressions in the holotype and all three Zambian specimens. Combined with the medial depression at the anterior end of the premaxillary secondary
palate, the prominent lateral anterior palatal ridges, and the Yshaped anterior end of the posterior median palatal ridge, the

521

division of the embayment of the palatal rim by a ridge gives
the secondary palate of C. helmoedi an extremely distinctive
appearance that is autapomorphic for the species.
All known specimens of Compsodon are tusked (Figs 1F, 2F,
3F, 4D), although the left alveolus of NHCC LB14 is empty and
CT scan data reveal that there is no replacement tusk in the
maxillary antrum. Dicynodont tusks generally are considered to
have grown throughout life without replacement (although see
Camp 1956 and Reisz et al. 2015), and this fact combined with
the absence of any sign of a replacement tusk lead us to conclude that the ‘missing’ tusk is a taphonomic artefact, not evidence of replacement. Van Hoepen (1934) figured a denticulated
tooth fragment that was found during preparation of the holotype of C. helmoedi, and because that specimen preserves an
unserrated maxillary ‘postcanine’ (see below), he hypothesized
that the fragment was part of an originally serrated tusk. Serrated tusks are otherwise unknown in dicynodonts, so their presence in Compsodon would be highly surprising, particularly
considering that the portions of the tusks preserved in the alveoli of the holotype lack serrations. The coarse denticles shown
in the figure of van Hoepen (1934) bear a close resemblance to
the denticles found on the dentary teeth of many dicynodonts
(e.g. compare van Hoepen’s fig. 3 to the dentary teeth shown in
Angielczyk et al. 2014b, fig. 3) and we think it is most likely that
the figured fragment was part of a dentary tooth. Unfortunately,
the tooth fragment has been lost in the time since van Hoepen’s
(1934) description, so we cannot confirm this hypothesis by
direct observation.
Several maxillary ‘postcanines’ are present in Compsodon
(Figs 1F, 2F, 3F, 4D). Van Hoepen (1934) reported a single
complete ‘postcanine’ in the left maxilla of the holotype and the
broken bases of two ‘postcanines’ on the right side, and we have
been able to confirm this in our observations of the specimen.
In NHCC LB13 the alveoli are best preserved on the right side
of the specimen. There, the base of one ‘postcanine’ is preserved
and two empty alveoli are visible. Interestingly the preserved
tooth is located in between the alveoli and slightly lateral to
them, suggesting that it might be a replacement tooth. A single
large alveolar space containing the base of one tooth is present
on the left side of NHCC LB14. On the right side of this specimen one empty alveolus is present, and posterior to it is a second containing the base of a tooth. Slightly lateral to the tooth
are the remains of two smaller teeth. Only the left tooth-bearing

Skulls of Compsodon helmoedi van Hoepen 1934. A–D, photographs of referred specimen NHCC LB116 in left lateral (A),
posterior (B), dorsal (C), and ventral (D) views. E, photograph of right snout of referred specimen NHCC LB14 in anterolateral view.
Anterior is to the lower right. F, photograph of right orbit of holotype NMQR 1460 in anterolateral view; anterior is to the lower
right. G, photograph of right anterior braincase elements of holotype NMQR 1460 in ventrolateral view; anterior is to the upper right.
H, photograph of right posterior braincase elements of holotype NMQR 1460 in ventrolateral view; anterior is to the right. I, photograph of basicranium of referred specimen NHCC LB116 in posteroventral view; anterior is to the top. Abbreviations: ap, anterior
plate; alp, alar process; bo, basioccipital; cp, cultriform process; ec, ectopterygoid; eo, exoccipital; epi, epipterygoid; f, fossa; fa, facet;
fr, frontal; ic, internal carotid canal; ip, interparietal; ipv, interpterygoid vacuity; jf, jugular foramen; ju, jugal; la, lacrimal; lf, lacrimal
foramen; mx, maxilla; na, nasal; oc, occipital condyle; pa, parietal; pbs, parabasisphenoid; pc, ‘postcanine’ tooth; pe, periotic; pf, postfrontal; pif, pineal foramen; pl, palatine; pla, pila antotica; plf, palatine foramen; pm, premaxilla; po, postorbital; pp, preparietal; pr,
prefrontal; prs, presphenoid; pt, pterygoid; ptf, posttemporal fenestra; qd, quadrate; qj, quadratojugal; smf, septomaxillary foramen;
smx, septomaxilla; so, supraoccipital; sq, squamosal; st, stapes; VII, foramen for facial nerve; vo, vomer. Upper scale bar (A–D) represents 2 cm; lower scale bar (E–I) represents 1 cm.

FIG. 4.

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ANGIELCZYK & KAMMERER: REDESCRIPTION OF COMPSODON

PAPERS IN PALAEONTOLOGY, VOLUME 3

region is preserved in NHCC LB116. There is an empty alveolus
anteriorly, followed by the remains of two ‘postcanines.’ From
this it appears that Compsodon typically had two to four erupted
‘postcanines’ at a given time. The tooth rows trend slightly

anteromedially to posterolaterally, but they are always more or
less at the level of the tusk. This is similar to the condition in
Emydops but contrasts with the more medially placed tooth rows
of taxa such as Pristerodon or Brachyprosopus. The complete
‘postcanine’ in the holotype (Fig. 1I) has a simple conical crown
that lacks serrations or denticles, similar to the maxillary ‘postcanines’ of most other toothed dicynodonts (e.g. Angielczyk
et al. 2014b).
The nasals form most of the dorsal surface of the anterior portion of the snout, surrounding the ascending process of the premaxilla and contributing to the dorsal margin of the external naris
(Figs 1B, D; 2B, D; 3B, D; 4A, C). A prominent, diamond-shaped
nasal boss is present. The boss has a continuous posterior border,
and does not bifurcate anteriorly as in Brachyprosopus, resulting in
it forming a single swelling on the snout. The surface of the boss
is slightly rugose and bears nutritive foramina similar to those
present on the maxilla and premaxilla. The nasal contacts the
maxilla and lacrimal on the facial surface of the skull, and it has a
small contact with the septomaxilla along the rim of the external
naris. On the dorsal surface of the skull, the nasal contacts the prefrontal and frontal. The nasofrontal suture is interdigitated and
gently concave anteriorly; it does not closely approach the premaxilla as in some dicynodontoids (Kammerer et al. 2011).
The prefrontal is crescentic and forms parts of the dorsal and
anterior walls of the orbit (Figs 1B, D; 2B, D; 3B, D; 4A, C). On
the external surface of the skull, the prefrontal contacts the nasal
and lacrimal anteriorly and the frontal posteriorly. The anterior
portion of the orbital rim formed by the prefrontal is flush with
the surrounding skull roof, but the rim becomes slightly raised
near the contact between the prefontal and frontal. Within the
orbit, the prefontal shares a relatively straight suture with the
lacrimal just above the lacrimal foramen. More posteriorly, the
prefrontal meets the frontal along an interdigitated suture that is
angled anteroventrally. As in other emydopoids (e.g. Cluver
1974b), the prefrontal extends medially to partially close off the
nasal cavity. A prefrontal boss is absent.
The lacrimal forms parts of the anterior and anteroventral
margins of the orbit, and also has a small facial process that
extends anteriorly to contact the prefrontal, nasal, and maxilla
(Figs 1B, D; 2B, D; 3B, D; 4A, C). Within the orbit, the lacrimal
contacts the prefrontal dorsally and the jugal posteriorly. Like
the prefrontal, the lacrimal extends medially to partially close off
the nasal cavity. A large, oval lacrimal foramen is present at the
anteroventral corner of the orbit.
The jugal forms the posterior portion of the floor of the orbit,
where it contacts the lacrimal and maxilla (Figs 1B, D, F;
2B, D, F; 3B, D, F; 4A, C). Posteriorly, the jugal slopes ventrally
to meet the ectopterygoid and palatine just above the posterior
end of the postcaniniform keel. A labial fossa is absent. The jugal
also bears a posterior process that meets the squamosal along a
long scarf joint and forms most of the medial surface of the zygomatic arch. A short process that arises from the zygomatic
Skulls of Compsodon helmoedi van Hoepen 1934.
Referred specimen RC 641 in: A, dorsal; and B, left lateral view.
Referred specimen RC 736 in dorsal (C) and right lateral (D)
views. Abbreviations: mf, mandibular fenestra; sr?, possible sclerotic ring. Scale bar represents 2 cm.

FIG. 5.

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

522

portion of the jugal extends dorsally along the posterior surface
of the postorbital bar for about one-third of the bar’s length.
A ring of dark red staining is present on the matrix that fills the
orbit of RC 736 (Fig. 5D). Given that sclerotic ossicles are known
to occur in many synapsid clades, including dicynodonts (e.g.
Angielczyk & Schmitz 2014), we consider it likely that the red
staining represents the remains of sclerotic ossicles in this specimen. We do not think the ring is a cosmetic alteration of the specimen because similar red staining occurs in seemingly random
locations elsewhere on the specimen (e.g. near the rim of the
palate, on the lateral surface of the mandible). The external diameter of the ring (measured anteroposteriorly) is approximately
19 mm, and the internal diameter (measured anteroposteriorly) is
approximately 11 mm. The maximum anteroposterior length of
the orbit is approximately 28 mm.
The frontals form most of the interorbital portion of the skull
roof, contacting the nasals and prefrontals anteriorly (Figs 1D,
2D, 3D, 4C). Along the midline of the skull, the mid-frontal
suture is located on a rounded ridge. The lateral edge of the
frontals curves dorsally to form a slightly raised orbital rim, continuing the rim that begins on the posterior part of the prefrontals. Posteriorly, the lateral edge of the frontal is more
strongly raised to meet the postfrontal. Just anterior to its suture
with the preparietal, a depression is present on the dorsal surface
of the frontal that is bounded by the raised lateral rim of the
bone, the midline ridge bearing the mid-frontal suture, and the
raised surface of the preparietal. Posteriorly, the frontal bears a
long, tapering process that wedges between two narrow anterior
processes of the parietal. The interorbital skull roof is only
slightly narrower than the temporal bar. Laterally, the frontal
contributes to the dorsolateral rim of the orbit, where it meets
the prefrontal along an anteroventrally-sloping suture and the
postfrontal along a posteromedially-directed suture (Figs 1B, 2B,
3B, 4A).
The postfrontal is a narrow, strap-like bone that wedges
between the frontal, postorbital, and parietal (Figs 1D, 2D, 3D,
4C). It is widest anteriorly, where it forms the posterodorsal corner of the orbital rim, and tapers posteriorly. The postfrontal is
raised above the level of the frontal, such that the lateral edge of
the frontal curves dorsally to meet the postfrontal. However, the
suture between these elements is flat and flush; it is not on a
distinct raised ridge as in some Eosimops specimens (Angielczyk
& Rubidge 2013). The dorsal surface of the postfrontal is flat in
the holotype, but it is slightly concave dorsally in the better preserved Zambian specimens. The retention of the postfrontal as a
distinct element is unusual in emydopoids. A postfrontal also is
present in Emydops (Fr€
obisch & Reisz 2008) but it is absent in
Digalodon, Dicynodontoides, Kombuisia, Myosaurus, Cistecephalus,
Cistecephaloides, Sauroscaptor and Kawingasaurus (Cox 1959,
1972; Keyser 1973; Cluver 1974a, b; Fr€
obisch 2007; Kammerer
et al. 2015a, 2016).
The preparietal is triangular, with its apex directed posteriorly
(Figs 1D, 2D, 3D, 4C). Anteriorly, it contacts the frontals along
a suture that is slightly convex anteriorly, and posteriorly it
abuts the posterior processes of the frontals and the anterior
processes of the parietals. The preparietal seems to have made a
variable contribution to the pineal foramen. In the holotype, the
posterior-most tip of the element appears to just reach the edge

523

of the foramen, whereas in the Zambian specimens it is just
excluded from the foramen (best seen in NHCC LB13). The
edges of the element are raised, particularly the posterior portions of the lateral edges, which are developed into distinct
ridges that are contiguous with the ‘lips’ that surround the
pineal foramen. The raised edges also contribute to the margins
of the frontal depressions described above, and also give the dorsal surface of the preparietal a somewhat depressed appearance.
The pineal foramen is round to oval and is surrounded completely or nearly completely by the parietals (Figs 1D, 2D, 3D,
4C). A true pineal boss is absent, but in the Zambian specimens
the foramen is flanked laterally by swollen, ‘lip’-like eminences
of the parietals that are similar to those described in Digalodon
(Kammerer et al. 2015a). The ‘lips’ are most weakly developed
at the anterior and posterior edges of the foramen, but unlike in
Digalodon, they are not completely separated. Posteriorly, the
‘lips’ merge with a ridge that extends along the midline of the
parietals. The pineal ‘lips’ and associated parietal ridge are
absent in the holotype. On the left side of that specimen, the
bone surface of the edge of the pineal foramen is clearly damaged, but the right side is seemingly well-preserved. Instead of a
swollen ‘lip’, the edge of the foramen is drawn into a slightly
raised, sharp edge. The significance of this variation is uncertain.
Kammerer et al. (2015a) raised the possibility that similar variation might have been an expression of sexual dimorphism in
Digalodon, but as in that case, additional specimens of Compsodon will be needed to test this hypothesis.
Compared to most emydopoids, the parietals of Compsodon
are quite narrowly exposed on the dorsal surface of skull
(Figs 1D, 2D, 3D, 4C). This morphology has been exaggerated
by lateral compression in the holotype, but the Zambian specimens show that this was the case even in undeformed skulls. A
distinct midline suture between the parietals is not evident in
the holotype or the Zambian specimens, including in the CT
data for NHCC LB14 (Fig. 7E), raising the possibility that the
parietals formed a single fused element (the bones of the skull
roof are highly cracked in RC 461 and RC 736, obscuring possible sutures).
Anteriorly, the parietals surround the pineal foramen and
contact the preparietal. They also send a pair of narrow, tapered
processes anteriorly, which wedge between the frontal and postfrontal. The surface morphology of the parietals posterior to the
pineal foramen is complex. As noted above, a rounded midline
ridge extends posteriorly from the ‘lips’ surrounding the pineal
foramen. The ridge tapers posteriorly and closely approaches the
suture with the interparietal. A shallow groove parallels the ridge
on either side, and lateral to the groove is a slightly raised surface. This surface is flat anteriorly, but bears a weak rounded
ridge posteriorly (best seen in NHCC LB14). Finally, the lateral
edge of the parietal sweeps dorsally to meet the raised medial
edge of the postorbital. At its anterior end, the suture between
the parietal and postorbital is located medial to the raised edge
of the postorbital, at the level of the dorsal surface of the parietal. Moving posteriorly, the suture shifts laterally and dorsally,
such that it runs along the top of the raised edge near the posterior end of the skull roof. The parietal–interparietal suture is
interdigitated and located near the posterior edge of the skull
roof, such that the interparietal does not strongly contribute to

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ANGIELCZYK & KAMMERER: REDESCRIPTION OF COMPSODON

PAPERS IN PALAEONTOLOGY, VOLUME 3

the dorsal surface of the skull. A slender, tapering process of the
parietal extends posteriorly beyond the level of the occipital
plate, wedging between the postorbital, interparietal, tabular,
and squamosal (best seen in NHCC LB14; Fig. 2H).
Ventrally, a relatively large adductor fossa is present (see discussion of this character in Angielczyk & Kurkin 2003a and
Maisch 2003). The medial wall of the fossa is formed by the
sheet-like descending flange of the parietal and it is roofed by
the postorbital. The dorsal end of the epipterygoid contacts the
ventral edge of the descending flange. Unfortunately, sutures on
the lateral surface of the braincase are not sufficiently well preserved to determine the relationships between the parietal, interparietal and periotic, but given the close approach of the alar
process of the periotic and the descending flange of the parietal,
there may have been some contact between the parietal and
periotic.
The postorbital is a large element that forms the postorbital
bar and contributes to the lateral portion of the skull roof. The
postorbital bar is best preserved in the holotype and NHCC
LB14, and in those specimens it is narrow and rod-like (Figs 1B,
2B). It is not anteroposteriorly expanded as in Eosimops or Lanthanostegus (Angielczyk & Rubidge 2013), and it lacks the bosses
or other ornamentation found in some dicynodonts (e.g. geikiids; Kammerer et al. 2015b). The footplate of the postorbital bar
contacts the squamosal and jugal, and a short process of the
jugal extends up the posterior surface of the bar.
At the junction of the postorbital bar and the skull roof, the
postorbital abuts the postfrontal along a smooth, laterally-concave suture (Figs 1D, 2D, 3D, 4C). From there, the postorbital
curves posteriorly along the lateral surface of the temporal bar,
where it contacts the parietal. The temporal portion of the
postorbital overlaps the parietals more extensively than is typical in most emydopoids (although less than in Dicynodontoides
and Kombuisia; Cox 1959; Fr€
obisch 2007). The postorbitals are
widest and approach each other most closely near the posterior
edge of the skull roof, giving the temporal portion of the postorbital a somewhat triangular appearance in dorsal view (best
seen in NHCC LB13, NCHH LB116 and RC 641). The medial
edge of the postorbital is drawn into a vertical ridge that separates most of the dorsal surface of the postorbital from the
dorsal surface of the parietal. Lateral to the ridge, the dorsal
surface slopes gently ventrolaterally until near its lateral edge,
where it curls sharply ventrally. This sharp ventral curl probably represents a remnant of the bi-planar configuration of the
postorbital that has been described in many emydopoids (e.g.
Kammerer et al. 2015a). The postorbital roofs the adductor
fossa on the ventral surface of the skull roof, and its ventrallycurled lateral edge forms the lateral margin of the fossa.
Posteriorly, the postorbital contacts the squamosal. When the
morphology of the skull roof is considered as a whole, it
differs strongly from the ‘typical’ emydopoid configuration of
broadly exposed parietals and strongly biplanar postorbitals
seen in taxa such as Emydops, Myosaurus or Digalodon (Cluver
1974b; Fr€
obisch & Reisz 2008; Kammerer et al. 2015a), as well
as the narrow, crest-like temporal bars of Dicynodontoides and
Kombuisia (Cox 1959; Fr€
obisch 2007). Instead, the appearance
is more reminiscent of cryptodonts (Fig. 7) such as Oudenodon, Tropidostoma, Odontocyclops or Idelesaurus (e.g. Keyser

1975; Cluver & King 1983; Angielczyk 2002a; Angielczyk &
Kurkin 2003a; Kurkin 2006).
The squamosal consists of temporal, zygomatic, and quadrate
rami. The temporal ramus is mediolaterally-flattened and forms
the posterior margin of the temporal fenestra (Figs 1B, D;
2B, D; 3B, D; 4A, C). Anteriorly, it contacts the parietal and
postorbital near the posterior edge of the skull roof. Medially,
the temporal ramus contacts the tabular and possibly the squamosal, but the sutures for these elements are difficult to discern
in the available specimens. The temporal and zygomatic rami
form an obtuse angle in posterior view (Figs 2H, 3H, 4B) in
contrast to the more perpendicular arrangement of the processes
in Emydops (Angielczyk et al. 2005). The zygomatic ramus itself
is mediolaterally expanded and bows laterally along its length
(Figs 1B, D, F; 2B, D, F; 4A, C, D). Unlike that of many cryptodonts (e.g. Kammerer et al. 2015b) it is unornamented. Its anterior tip tapers to a fine point that wedges between the jugal
and maxilla just anterior to the postorbital bar. The zygomatic
ramus of the squamosal also has a long contact with the jugal
along its medial surface. It is uncertain whether the footplate of
the postorbital bar also contacts the squamosal. A contact
between the elements is present in the holotype and NHCC
LB14, but the postorbital bar appears to be somewhat displaced
in each of those specimens. NHCC LB116 appears to be more
pristinely preserved, and a thin sliver of the jugal wedges
between the postorbital bar and the squamosal in that specimen,
which we suspect represents the original morphology.
The quadrate ramus of the squamosal extends ventrally from
its junction with the zygomatic and temporal processes (Figs 1H,
2H, 3H, 4B). The quadrate–quadratojugal complex rests in a
fossa on the anterior surface of the quadrate process. A vertical
ridge divided this fossa into a larger lateral area that accommodated the quadratojugal and a smaller, ventrolaterally-facing
medial facet for the quadrate. In posterior view, the squamosal
almost completely covers the quadrate–quadratojugal, such that
only the articular surfaces of the jaw joint are visible. Medially,
the quadrate process contacts the supraoccipital, and paroccipital
process of the periotic, and also contributes to the lateral and
dorsal margins of the posttemporal fenestra. The lateral edge of
the quadrate process is convex laterally, giving the junction
between it and the zygomatic process the notched shape that
common in many dicynodonts. The lateral surface of the quadrate process (Figs 1B, 2B, 3B, 4A) bears a well-developed fossa
for the inferred attachment of M. adductor mandibulae externus
lateralis (e.g. Crompton & Hotton 1967; King et al. 1989;
Angielczyk 2004). The more ventral portion of this fossa is nearvertically oriented, but about halfway along its height, the fossa
angles sharply posteriorly such that its upper portion is nearly
horizontal. The lateral edge of the more vertical portion of the
fossa curls anteriorly in a manner somewhat reminiscent of that
observed in Brachyprosopus (Angielczyk et al. 2016), albeit to a
less extreme degree.
The vomer is a single fused element (Figs 1F, 2F, 3B, 3F, 4D).
Anteriorly it contacts the premaxilla at the posterior end of the
posterior median palatal ridge. The vomer contacts the palatines
laterally and forms the medial portion of the roof of the choana.
The midventral vomerine plate is relatively narrow, but it bears
a groove with thin lateral edges on its ventral surface. The width

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

524

of the plate is constant along its length: there is no expanded
anterior area as is observed in pylaecephalids (Angielczyk &
Rubidge 2013). The posterior end of the midventral vomerine
plate bifurcates to form the anterior margins of the interpterygoid vacuity. Posteriorly, the vomer contacts the pterygoids.
The general morphology of the palatine is typical of dicynodonts, consisting of a flattened pad that contacts the secondary
palate and a posterior plate-like portion that curves dorsally to
form the lateral portion of the choanal roof (Figs 1F; 2F; 3B F;
4D). The palatine pad is square to sub-triangular in shape and
its ventral surface is smooth, lacking the rugosity seen in most
dicynodontoids. The medial surface of the pad is horizontal, but
its lateral margin slopes ventrally to merge with the posterior
surface of the caniniform process. A circular foramen pierces the
surface of the pad near its medial edge, as in most other emydopoids (e.g. Angielczyk 2001; Angielczyk & Kurkin 2003a). A
thin, L-shaped ridge separates the edge of the foramen from the
choana. Anteriorly, the palatine contacts the premaxilla and
maxilla. Laterally, it contacts the ectopterygoid and forms the
median wall of the lateral palatal foramen. Posterior to the foramen, the palatine contacts the pterygoid, and it abuts the vomer
near the midline of the skull. The lateral palatal foramen is slitlike and is located slightly posterior to the main portion of the
palatine pad, although it is at the same height as the pad, in
contrast to the case in taxa such as Brachyprosopus or Endothiodon (Cox & Angielczyk 2015; Angielczyk et al. 2016).
The ectopterygoid is a short, plate-like element (Figs 1B, F;
2B, F; 3B, F; 4A, D). The medial portion of its anterior end contacts the maxilla and the palatine, and it curves laterally to contact the jugal at the posterior end of the floor of the orbit.
Posteriorly, the ectopterygoid bifurcates into lateral and medial
rami that clasp the pterygoid and form the anterior portion of
the pterygoid girder. The medial part of the ramus comes to a
blunt edge at the level of the posterior end of the lateral palatal
foramen. The lateral ramus is longer and tapers to a pointed or
slightly interdigitated end on the lateral surface of the anterior
pterygoid ramus. The ectopterygoid forms the lateral wall of the
lateral palatal foramen.
The pterygoids are X-shaped in ventral view and extend
between the secondary palate and the basicranium (Figs 1B, F;
2B, F; 3B, F; 4A, D). The anterior pterygoid rami are very
straight, similar to the condition in Dicynodontoides (Cox 1959;
Angielczyk et al. 2009) but differing from most dicynodonts in
which they are gently convex laterally. The anterior end of the
anterior pterygoid ramus bifurcates into dorsal and ventral rami
that clasp the ectopterygoid, but it is excluded from the margin
of the lateral palatal foramen (best seen in NHCC LB14 and
LB116). A prominent triangular keel is present on the ventral
surface of the anterior ramus in the holotype and NHCC LB13,
but this is more weakly developed in NHCC LB14 and LB116.
The ventral surface of the anterior pterygoid ramus is smooth
and unridged.
The median pterygoid plate lies just posterior to the
interpterygoid vacuity, and the pterygoids appear to be fused
here; there is no evidence of a suture between them. The crista
oesophagea is not preserved well in the holotype or NHCC
LB13, but NHCC LB14 and LB116 show that it is tall and very
narrow, with an anterodorsally-sloping anterior edge. The

525

anterior surface of the crista in NHCC LB14 bears a very fine
longitudinal groove that widens slightly as it reaches the posterior end of the interpterygoid vacuity. Posteriorly, the median
pterygoid plate meets the parabasisphenoid along an interdigitated suture.
The posterior, or quadrate, rami of the pterygoids arise from
the posterolateral corners of the median pterygoid plate. They
are mediolaterally compressed, extremely gracile, and are slightly
dorsoventrally taller at their distal ends than at the median
pterygoid plate. The footplate of the epipterygoid rests on the
dorsal surface of the posterior pterygoid ramus and extends onto
the median pterygoid plate.
The interpterygoid vacuity is narrow and elongate (Figs 2F,
4D). Its posterior end is more rounded and the vacuity tapers
towards the point at which it reaches the midventral vomerine
plate. Compsodon has the longest interpterygoid vacuity relative
to basal skull length (BSL) of any of the 63 anomodont species
for which we have measurement data, averaging 22% of BSL.
Anteriorly, the lateral margins of the interpterygoid vacuity are
slightly raised ridges that are continuous with the edges of the
midventral vomerine plate, but posteriorly the edges of the vacuity are flush with the surrounding bone surfaces.
In NHCC LB13, a thin, rod-like element is displaced across
the posterior end of the interpterygoid vacuity (Fig. 3F). The
shaft of the rod is relatively straight, and the end closest to the
interpterygoid vacuity is slightly expanded. It resembles hyoid
elements that have been reported in other dicynodonts, particularly ceratohyals (e.g. Cox 1959; Ewer 1961; Barry 1967, 1968;
Cluver 1971). However, the shaft of the element in NHCC LB13
is straighter than is usually the case for known dicynodont ceratohyals.
The morphology of the epipterygoid is best shown by NHCC
LB14 and LB116 (Figs 2B, 4A). The footplate of the epipterygoid
is anteroposteriorly elongate and rests on the dorsal surface of
the median pterygoid plate and posterior ramus of the pterygoid. The anterior portion of the footplate is longer than the
posterior, and it lacks the dorsal process seen in many bidentalians (e.g. Angielczyk 2002a). The ascending process is extremely
delicate and angles anterodorsally. Its dorsal end is anteroposteriorly expanded where it meets the descending flange of the
parietals.
The fused parabasisphenoid complex lies posterior to the
median pterygoid plate and contributes to the posterior portion
of the crista oesophagea (Figs 1F, 2F, 3F, 4D). Typically in basal
dicynodonts, including most emydopoids, a pair of rounded,
well-separated ridges run along the ventral surface of the parabasisphenoid, connecting the median pterygoid plate and the
basitubera. In contrast, the ventral surface of the parabasisphenoid in Compsodon forms a single raised eminence between the
crista oesophagea and the basitubera. The small, oval internal
carotid foramina are located on either side of the midline of this
eminence, just posterior to the crista oesophagea. They are on
the ventral surface of the parabasisphenoid, not in the more dorsal position seen in taxa such as Colobodectes, Brachyprosopus or
Eosimops (Angielczyk & Rubidge 2009, 2013; Angielczyk et al.
2016). A low, thin ridge extends posterolaterally from the posterior edge of each internal carotid foramen towards the anterolateral corner of the corresponding basituber (best seen in NHCC

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ANGIELCZYK & KAMMERER: REDESCRIPTION OF COMPSODON

PAPERS IN PALAEONTOLOGY, VOLUME 3

LB13). Posteriorly, the parabasisphenoid contacts the basioccipital. It contributes to the anterior margins of the basitubera, but
forms less than half of the rim of the fenestra ovalis and stapedial facet.
Anteriorly, the ventral edge of the cultriform process can be
seen when looking dorsally through the interpterygoid vacuity.
In lateral view, the lateral surface of the process is plate-like
(Figs 1B, 3B, 4G). The posterior portion of the process angles
anterodorsally, but it bends ventrally near the midpoint of its
length to take on a more horizontal orientation. A sub-triangular dorsal projection at the level of the bend (best seen in the
holotype; Fig. 4G) probably represents the presphenoid (Cluver
1971). The anterior portion of the cultriform process is clasped
ventrally by the vomer.
The anterior plate, formed by the mesethmoid and
orbitosphenoid (Cluver 1971; Sullivan & Reisz 2005) is well
exposed in the holotype and NHCC LB14 (Figs 1B, 4F). It is
separated from the cultriform process by a narrow gap. In lateral
view it has the form of a sub-rectangular plate, and its posterior
edge bears a prominent notch. Near its dorsal contact with the
frontals, the plate bifurcates to form the lateral walls of a
rounded tube that presumably served to transmit the olfactory
nerves.
The basioccipital forms the posterior end of the basicranium
and extends onto the occipital plate (Figs 1F, H; 2F, H; 3F, H;
4B, D). The basisphenoid–basioccipital tubera (basitubera) are
the most prominent feature of its ventral surface. They are
round, with a near-vertical anterior surface because of the raised
eminence on the parabasisphenoid. The fenestra ovalis is completely surrounded by the basicoccipital, which also forms the
majority of the ventrolaterally-angled stapedial facet. An intertuberal ridge is absent. However, a raised round facet is present
near the posterior edge of the ventral surface of the basioccipital
in NHCC LB13 and LB116 (Fig. 4I). Posteriorly, the basioccipital forms the medial portion of the floor of the occipital plate
and contributes to the ventral margin of the prominent jugular
foramen. It also forms the ventral lobe of the trilobate occipital
condyle (the two dorsal lobes are formed by the exoccipitals).
Laterally the basioccipital contacts the paroccipital process of the
periotic. Internally, the basioccipital forms the posterior floor of
the braincase. It bears a narrow ridge on its surface, which is
flanked by shallow depressions that lead into the vestibular
space. There is no sign of the unossified zone in the floor of the
braincase described for some dicynodonts (Olson 1944; Cluver
1971) in the CT data for NHCC LB14.
Well preserved stapes are present in NHCC LB14 and LB116
(Figs 2F, 4B, D, I). As is typical of dicynodonts, it is a robust
rod of bone (about 14 mm long, minimum crus thickness about
3 mm in NHCC LB14) with expanded proximal and distal ends.
The footplate is subcircular and fits snugly in the stapedial facet
of the basioccipital tuber. The crus is gently concave dorsally,
and rounded in cross-section near its junction with the footplate, becoming dorsoventrally flattened distally. A true stapedial
foramen is absent, because there is no upper crus to form the
dorsal margin of the foramen. Instead, the stapedial artery
passed through an opening bounded ventrally by the stapes and
dorsally by the paroccipital process. The distal end is anteroposteriorly expanded but dorsoventrally flattened, such that it has

the shape of a flattened oval in cross-section. A distinct dorsal
process, such as that described for Kombuisia (Fr€
obisch 2007),
appears to be absent. Laterally, the stapes contacts the medial
surface of the quadrate.
The stapes of NHCC LB14 is somewhat displaced from its
original position, but those of NHCC LB116 appear to be in
correct articulation (Fig. 4B, I). The more complete left stapes
of NHCC LB116 slopes ventrolaterally at angle of about 15°.
Recently, Laaß (2015, 2016) contrasted the ventrolaterally-angled
stapes of the cistecephalid Kawingasaurus with the more horizontal stapes of Pristerodon, suggesting that the former was specialized for transmitting ground-borne vibrations whereas the
latter was optimized for the transmission of airborne sound. The
angulation of the stapes in Compsodon is intermediate between
that of Pristerodon and Kawingasaurus, and if Laaß’s hypothesis
is correct, this could imply that the hearing function of Compsodon was similarly intermediate. Given that the overall skull
morphology of Compsodon does not show obvious specializations for a fossorial lifestyle, it might also indicate that experimentation with sensitivity to ground-borne vibrations began
among emydopoids before other adaptations for fossoriality
evolved, or that Laaß (2015) overstated the strength of correlation between these characters.
As is typical of dicynodonts, the quadrate and quadratojugal
are fused to form a single element (Figs 1B, 2B, 4A). Dorsally,
the quadrate possesses a rounded, plate-like process that rests in
a fossa on the anterior surface of the squamosal. It also contacts
the pterygoid and periotic medially. On the external surface of
this process, a low ridge runs from near the centre of the process
to the dorsal edge of the lateral quadrate condyle. A shallow
fossa is present just medial to this ridge. The anterior edge of
the process is convex anteriorly, but a distinct process that projects along the posterior pterygoid ramus is absent. Ventrally,
the quadrate expands to form the trochleated articular surface
that is characteristic of dicynodonts (e.g. Watson 1948; Crompton & Hotton 1967, King et al. 1989; Angielczyk 2004; Figs 1F,
2F, 3F, 4D). The articular condyles are of approximately the
same anteroposterior length, and are close to the same height.
However, the lateral condyle is broadly expanded laterally,
whereas the medial condyle is sub-rectangular, with its long axis
oriented anteroposteriorly. The articular surface of the lateral
condyle is smoothly convex. The medial condyle bears a sharp
ridge along the lateral edge of its articular surface, and the
remainder of the relatively flat articular surface slopes dorsomedially away from this ridge. In life position, the articular surface
faces anteroventrally. The quadrate forms the medial wall of the
quadrate foramen.
The quadratojugal is a plate-like element that forms the external surface of the ventral portion of the external lateral adductor
fossa (Figs 1B, 2B, 4A). It is widest dorsally, and forms the lateral wall of the quadrate foramen. The quadratojugal rests in a
shallow fossa on the lateral surface of the squamosal, and its
dorsal edge forms a weakly interdigitated suture with the raised
edge of this fossa. Ventrally, it is fused with the lateral surface of
the quadrate. The left quadrate–quadratojugal complex of
NHCC LB13 was lost during fossilization. When combined with
the smooth bone texture of the quadrate–quadratojugal fossa on
the squamosal, this suggests that the quadrate–quadratojugal

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

526

complex was only loosely attached to the skull, as proposed in
other dicynodonts (e.g. King 1981a). However, the complex
shape of the squamosal fossa, and the tight fit of the quadrate–
quadratojugal complex within the fossa, make the quadrate kinesis proposed for Endothiodon tolani (Cox & Angielczyk 2015)
unlikely in Compsodon.
The sutures bounding the interparietal are most visible in
NHCC LB14 (Figs 1H, 2H). Its occipital surface is roughly rectangular in shape, and dorsally it contacts the parietal along an
interdigitated suture located at the posterior edge of the temporal bar. Near its ventral contact with the supraoccipital, the surface of the interparietal is flat, but more dorsally it bears a
prominent, sharp, vertical nuchal crest, which is flanked by shallow vertical depressions. Laterally, the interparietal contacts the
tabular, and a very small contact with the squamosal may be
present at its dorsolateral corner. The interparietal almost certainly extends anteriorly above the periotic within the thickness
of the occipital plate, but poor sutural preservation prevents us
from stating this with certainty.
The tabular is a triangular element that fills the space on the
occiput between the squamosal, interparietal and supraoccipital
(Figs 1H, 2H). Its medial portion is smooth and flush with the
interparietal and supraoccipital, but the lateral portion of the
bone curls posteriorly to lie against the medial surface of the
temporal process of the squamosal, which extends posteriorly
beyond the level of the occipital plate. The sutures between the
supraoccipital and tabular are difficult to trace on the lateral
portion of the occiput in the available specimens.
The supraoccipital forms the central portion of the occiput
(Figs 1H, 2H, 3H, 4B). Dorsally, it contacts the interparietal
and tabular. It also forms the dorsal margin and parts of the
lateral margins of the oval foramen magnum. The lateral
sutures of the supraoccipital are very difficult to trace in the
available specimens, and its exact relationship with the tabular
and squamosal is uncertain. The tabular may separate the
supraoccipital from the squamosal. Ventrally, the supraoccipital
contacts the exoccipital and the periotic. In NHCC LB14, a
shallow groove extends dorsolaterally on the supraoccipital
from just lateral of the foramen magnum to a small foramen
located above the posttemporal fenestra (Fig. 2H). The position
of the foramen is similar to the ‘nutrient channel’ described in
Myosaurus and Lystrosaurus (Cluver 1971, 1974b) and the
groove and foramen are bilaterally symmetric, suggesting that
they are real features. A somewhat comparable structure is present on the left side of NHCC LB13 (Fig. 3H), but this character is not apparent in the other specimens. The supraoccipital
extends anteriorly to form part of the roof of the otic region,
but poor sutural preservation on the lateral sides of the braincase obscures its exact configuration relative to other bones in
this area.
The sutures delimiting the exoccipitals are difficult to discern
on the available specimens (Figs 1H, 2H, 3H, 4B). NHCC LB13
is the most informative specimen, and there the occipital portion of the exoccipital seems to consist of a rectangular plate
that extends between the supraoccipital and paroccipital process,
and forms the lower part of the lateral wall of the occipital condyle. This plate is at the level of the posttemporal fenestra, but
the exoccipital seems to be excluded from the margin of the

527

fenestra. A sub-rounded to crescentic facet for the proatlas
(Ewer 1961; Kemp 1969; Cluver 1971) is present midway up the
lateral wall of the foramen magnum. The exoccipitals form
the dorsal margins of the jugular foramina, and they contribute the
dorsal lobes of the trilobate occipital condyle. A prominent circular
depression is present in the centre of the occipital condyle.
The periotic is composed of the fused prootic and opisthotic.
The opisthotic portion of the element is best seem on the occipital surface of the skull, where it forms the robust paroccipital
process (Figs 1H, 2H, 3H, 4B). As is typical in dicynodonts, the
paroccipital process is widest laterally, where it contacts the
squamosal, and narrows medially. Near its ventrolateral corner,
the lateral edge of the process also has a small contact with the
medial surface of the quadrate and the posterior ramus of the
pterygoid. Dorsally, the paroccipital process forms the ventral,
medial, and part of the dorsal margins of the posttemporal fenestra and contacts the supraoccipital and exoccipital. Medially,
the process forms the lateral margin of the jugular foramen and
contacts the exoccipital and basioccipital. A prominent, spikelike ‘tympanic process’ (sensu Cox 1959) is present at the lateral
margin of the paroccipital process.
The lateral surface of the prootic portion of the periotic is
well exposed in the holotype and the three Zambian specimens
(Figs 1B, 2B, 3B, 4H). A long, narrow pila antotica projects
anterodorsally from the anterior edge of the prootic, and a welldeveloped trigeminal notch is present posterior to the pila. Ventral to the notch, the lateral surface of the prootic bears a welldefined crescentic fossa. A small, round foramen (best seen in
NHCC LB13) for the facial nerve (cranial nerve VII) is present
just below the raised ventral rim of the fossa, close to the junction between the prootic and the parabasisphenoid (Figs 3F,
4D). Dorsal and posterior to the fossa, a prominent rectangular
to trapezoidal alar process is present (Fig. 4H). The alar process
projects posterolaterally, and a well-developed pocket is present
behind it, which is contiguous with the slit-like internal manifestation of the posttemporal fenestra. An interdigitated suture
between the prootic and the supraoccipital is visible just above
the posttemporal fenestra in NHCC LB116, but sutures between
the prootic, the interparietal, and possibly the parietal are not
clearly preserved in any of the available specimens. The state of
preservation and preparation of the available specimens prevents
us from being able to determine whether a floccular fossa was
present.
RC 736 includes a highly weathered and damaged mandible
(Fig. 5D), but all other available specimens lack a mandible. Little useful information can be gleaned from RC 736, but the right
side of the specimen clearly shows the remains of a mandibular
fenestra on the lateral surface of the jaw. This strongly suggests
that the fenestra was not mostly or completely occluded by a
lamina of the dentary, as in Dicynodontoides or Kombuisia.
Angielczyk & Cox (2015) recently described two toothed emydopoid jaws from the Ruhuhu Basin of Tanzania, and in their
discussion of the identification of these specimens noted the
possibility, among others, that they represented the previously
unknown mandible of Compsodon. However, a dentary lamina
that occludes the mandibular fenestra is present in those specimens, allowing us to eliminate Compsodon as a potential identification.

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ANGIELCZYK & KAMMERER: REDESCRIPTION OF COMPSODON

PAPERS IN PALAEONTOLOGY, VOLUME 3

PHYLOGENETIC ANALYSIS
Method
The phylogenetic relationships of Compsodon helmoedi
have received very little attention in the dicynodont literature. Van Hoepen (1934) provided the most detailed
consideration in his description of the species, suggesting that it was closely related to Tropidostoma, and that
both taxa were probably close to the ancestry of Dicynodon sensu lato. Toerien (1954) suggested a close relationship with Emydops in the context of his work on
the phylogenetic significance of dicynodont palatal
structure (Toerien 1953). Cluver & King (1983) and
King (1988) listed it as incertae sedis in their classifications of dicynodonts, and Angielczyk et al. (2014a) suggested that it was likely to be an emydopoid, but the
latter conclusion was based on a superficial consideration of a few characters, not a formal phylogenetic analysis. Indeed, Compsodon has never been included in a
cladistic analysis, so we will investigate its relationships
here for the first time.
Our phylogenetic data matrix includes the same list of
characters as that of Angielczyk et al. (in press), but taxon
sampling has been modified here. Besides C. helmoedi, we
added three recently described Permian dicynodont species as operational taxonomic units (OTUs): Rastodon
procurvidens, Sauroscaptor tharavati and Bulbasaurus phylloxyron. We removed one OTU, the putative lystrosaurid
species represented by TSK 2 (e.g. Kammerer et al. 2011;
Angielczyk et al. 2014a) because ongoing research suggests that it may not be a distinct taxon (CFK, pers.
obs.). The finished dataset included 103 OTUs and 194
characters (the character list and data matrix are archived
in the Dryad Digital Data Repository: Angielczyk & Kammerer 2017). Of these characters, 171 are discrete binary
or multistate characters, of which 7 characters were
ordered and 164 were treated as unordered. All discretestate characters were weighted equally. The remaining 23
characters are continuous. We treated the continuous
characters as additive using the method of Goloboff et al.
(2006), with mean values used as the codings for the
OTUs except in cases when only a single measurement
was available for an OTU. Unknown and inapplicable discrete state and continuous characters were coded as ‘?’
(Strong & Lipscomb 2000).
We analysed the dataset using TNT 1.1 (October 2010
version) (Goloboff et al. 2008), and two search strategies
were employed. The first search used the new technology
methods of TNT. We utilized a driven search with the initial search level set at 65, which was checked every three
hits. The initial number of addition sequence replicates was
500, and the search was required to find the shortest length
trees 20 times. The analysis started with default settings for

sectorial searching, tree drifting, parsimony ratchet and tree
fusing. In the second analysis, we used the traditional
search method of TBR branch swapping with 10 000 replicates and 10 trees held per replicate. Biarmosuchus served
as the outgroup to root the most parsimonious cladograms
from both analyses.
We utilized symmetric resampling (Goloboff et al.
2003), jackknife analysis (Mueller & Ayala 1982; Farris
et al. 1996) and decay analysis (Bremer 1988, 1994) to
measure support for the most parsimonious cladograms.
The symmetric resampling results are based on 10 000
replicates; each replicate included a new technology
search with default settings for tree drifting, parsimony
ratchet and tree fusing, and 10 random addition sequence
replicates. Absolute frequency values were used to summarize the results (Kopuchian & Ramırez 2010). Recent
research (e.g. Kopuchian & Ramırez 2010; Simmons &
Freudenstein 2011) suggests that jackknife-based resampling approaches produce fewer spurious groups than
bootstrap-based methods, so we also conducted a jackknife analysis as an additional measure of clade support.
We utilized 10 000 resampling replicates, with a 36%
probability of character removal, and the same search
parameters as for the symmetric resampling analysis. The
decay analysis results are based on a sample of 997 860
suboptimal cladograms with lengths up to six steps longer
than the most parsimonious cladograms. Following the
recommendations of Goloboff et al. (2008), the suboptimal trees were generated through a series of traditional
searches in which the length of suboptimal cladograms
retained as well as the number of suboptimal cladograms
were incrementally increased. The resulting cladograms
were filtered to remove duplicates before the decay analysis, so all 997 860 cladograms in the sample are unique.
Finally, a 50% majority-rule consensus of the 997 860
cladograms was calculated to gain insight into how frequently the clades recovered in the most parsimonious
cladograms are represented in suboptimal trees.
Compsodon was reconstructed as a member of Emydopoidea in the primary phylogenetic analysis (see
below). As noted above, van Hoepen (1934) considered
Compsodon to be closely related to Tropidostoma, so we
conducted a constrained analysis to evaluate this hypothesis. We constrained Tropidostoma, Australobarbarus and
Compsodon to form a clade; because Australobarbarus and
Tropidostoma have been reconstructed as closely related in
all recent phylogenetic analyses, our constraint tree is
essentially a modern restatement of van Hoepen’s (1934)
hypothesis. A somewhat related recent problem in studies
of dicynodont phylogeny concerns the monophyly of the
clade Cryptodontia. Although a monophyletic Cryptodontia has been part of the results of many phylogenetic analyses of dicynodonts (e.g. also see review in Kammerer &
Angielczyk 2009; Fr€
obisch et al. 2010; Kammerer et al.

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

528

2011, 2013; Castanhinha et al. 2013; Cox & Angielczyk
2015; Kammerer & Smith 2017), it has been recovered as
a grade in some recent studies (Angielczyk et al. 2016;
Boos et al. 2016). Because our most parsimonious cladograms included a paraphyletic Cryptodontia, and also differed in certain other ways from the results of most
recent analyses (e.g. placement of Lystrosauridae near the
base of Dicynodontoidea; see below), we ran a constrained analysis in which we required Cryptodontia to be
monophyletic. Our composition of Cryptodontia followed
that of Kammerer & Smith (2017): Aulacephalodon,
Australobarbarus, Bulbasaurus, Daqingshanodon, Geikia
elginensis, G. locusticeps, Idelesaurus, Keyseria, Kitchinganomodon,
Odontocyclops,
Oudenodon,
Pelanomodon,
Rhachiocephalus, Syops and Tropidostoma. The detailed
topologies of the constraint trees are archived in the
Dryad Digital Data Repository (Angielczyk & Kammerer
2017). We used the same search parameters in the constrained searches as we did for the primary new technology search.

RESULTS
The new technology traditional searches recovered two most
parsimonious cladograms (length = 1131.746 steps; consistency index = 0.241; retention index = 0.718); a strict consensus of the cladograms is shown in Figure 6. The topology
shows a mixture of similarities to and differences from other
recent analyses of anomodont phylogeny. For example,
among non-dicynodont anomodonts, Venyukovioidea occupies a more rootward position and Anomocephaloidea a
more derived position than in the analyses of Angielczyk
et al. (2016) and Boos et al. (2016). The topology for
non-bidentalian dicynodonts is more similar to that of
Angielczyk et al. (2016) and Boos et al. (2016) than Cox &
Angielczyk (2015) in the separation of pylaecephalids and
emydopoids, and it particularly resembles the tree of Boos
et al. (2016) in its paraphyly of Cryptodontia, although the
arrangement of taxa within this grade is somewhat different.
The relationships of Kannemeyeriiformes also differ from
those of most recent analyses in the paraphyly of Shansiodontidae, the monophyly of Kannemeyeriidae, and the
placement of Angonisaurus and Dinodontosaurus on the
branch leading to Stahleckeriidae. These changes are treated
in more detail by Angielczyk et al. (in press).
Compsodon helmoedi was recovered as a member of
Emydopoidea, specifically as the sister taxon of Emydops.
Eight discrete-state synapomorphies support Emydopoidea in this analysis: lateral anterior palatal ridges
present (character (ch.) 3, state 1); palatal surface of premaxilla with well-defined depressions with curved sides
lateral to median ridge (ch. 6, state 0); caniniform depression has the form of an embayment bounded by a ridge

529

medially of palatal rim anterior to caniniform process or
tusk (ch. 28, state 1); anterior pterygoid keel restricted to
anterior tip of anterior ramus of pterygoid (ch. 89, state
1); dentary table absent (ch. 124, state 0); anterodorsal
edge of lateral dentary shelf with a groove (ch. 128, state
1); three sacral vertebrae (ch. 142, state 0); ectepicondylar
foramen on humerus present (ch. 154, state 0). Compsodon can only be coded for the first four of these characters with the available specimens, but in each of those
four cases it displays the expected character state. The
Compsodon–Emydops clade is supported by four discretestate synapomorphies: posterior median ridge present
with a flattened, expanded anterior area (ch. 5 state 1);
maxillary non-caniniform teeth located near lateral margin of maxilla (ch. 23, state 0); ventral edge of caniniform
process at the same level to slightly posterior to anterior
orbital margin (ch. 32, state 1); and lateral edge of paroccipital process drawn into sharp posteriorly-directed process that is distinctly offset from the surface of the
occipital plate present (ch. 112, state 1). The constrained
analysis shows that a close relationship between C. helmoedi, Tropidostoma and Australobarbarus is not well supported by the available character data. The two most
parsimonious cladograms from that analysis have a length
of 1153.063 steps, 21.317 steps longer than the cladograms from the unconstrained analysis. However, topologies consistent with a monophyletic Cryptodontia (sensu
Kammerer & Smith 2017; Angielczyk & Kammerer 2017)
are only 1.5 steps longer (i.e. 1133.246 steps) than the
most parsimonious cladograms from the unconstrained
analysis. The position of C. helmoedi as the sister taxon
of Emydops within Emydopoidea is unchanged in the two
most parsimonious cladograms in which Cryptodontia is
constrained to be monophyletic.
The results of the symmetric resampling, jackknife, and
decay analyses indicate that the most parsimonious cladograms from the unconstrained analysis are characterized by
overall weak branch support (Fig. 6, results from the jackknife analysis are archived in the Dryad Digital Data Repository; Angielczyk & Kammerer 2017). However, the
placement of C. helmoedi as the sister taxon of Emydops is
moderately well-supported, decaying in 1.553 steps and
receiving symmetric resampling and jackknife percentages
of 65 and 67, respectively. This relationship also is present
in 99% of the sample of 997 860 cladograms used in the
decay analysis.

DISCUSSION
Validity of Compsodon helmoedi
Considering that Compsodon largely has been ignored in
the dicynodont literature since the 1950s, and the

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ANGIELCZYK & KAMMERER: REDESCRIPTION OF COMPSODON

PAPERS IN PALAEONTOLOGY, VOLUME 3

Strict consensus of two most parsimonious cladograms from the phylogenetic analysis. Scores: 1131.746 steps; consistency
index = 0.241; retention index = 0.718. The cladogram has been subdivided to show the relationships of: A, outgroup taxa and nonbidentalian anomodonts; B, Kannemeyeriiformes; C, non-kannemeyeriiform bidentalians. Numbers at nodes represent decay index
(left/top), symmetric resampling (middle), and the percentage of the 997 860 suboptimal trees in which the node is resolved (right/
bottom). Results of the jackknife analysis are similar to those of the symmetric resampling analysis, and are archived in the Dryad Digital Data Repository (Angielczyk & Kammerer 2017).

FIG. 6.

extensive changes in dicynodont alpha taxonomy that
have taken place since that time, an important question
to address is whether C. helmoedi is a valid species. In the
phylogenetic analysis, C. helmoedi is recovered as an emydopoid, and it can be distinguished easily from other
members of the clade. It is clearly not a synonym of any

of the cistecephalid species, since it lacks features such as
the highly roofed-over, box-like skull and closed-off
interpterygoid vacuity that are typical of that clade. The
exposure of the parietals on the dorsal surface of the skull
is much narrower in C. helmoedi than in taxa such as
Emydops, Digalodon and Myosaurus, and the presence of

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

530

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Continued

FIG. 6.

531

ANGIELCZYK & KAMMERER: REDESCRIPTION OF COMPSODON

PAPERS IN PALAEONTOLOGY, VOLUME 3

maxillary ‘postcanines’ further differentiates it from the
latter two taxa. The presence of ‘postcanine’ teeth also
distinguishes C. helmoedi from Dicynodontoides and Kombuisia, as do other characters such as the less crest-like
temporal bar, the presence of postfrontals, the presence of
strong depressions on the dorsal surface of the frontals,
and lateral exposure of the mandibular foramen. Some
recent papers have suggested that Cryptocynodon and
Niassodon are members of Emydopoidea (Castanhinha
et al. 2013; Angielczyk et al. 2016) but these taxa also
show clear differences from C. helmoedi. Both Cryptocynodon and Niassodon possess longer, more medially-placed
maxillary tooth rows and more anteroposteriorly-elongate
palatine pads than Compsodon, and they are further differentiated by characters such as their broader exposure
of the parietals on the dorsal surface of the skull roof.
Finally, Angielczyk & Cox (2015) described an emydopoid
mandible morphotype from the Ruhuhu Basin, which
they suggested could represent the jaw of Compsodon,
among other hypotheses. As noted above, the prominent
mandibular fenestra of RC 736 is not present in the jaws
described by Angielczyk & Cox (2015), leading us to conclude that those specimens are unlikely to represent
C. helmoedi.
Besides the emydopoids, three other dicynodont taxa,
Eosimops, Tropidostoma and Australobarbarus, require close
comparison with Compsodon. Like C. helmoedi, the anterior
end of the posterior median palatal ridge of Eosimops
expands into a Y-shaped platform, a morphology that is
unique to these two taxa. However, a number of other
characters differentiate Eosimops and C. helmoedi, such as
the anteroposteriorly expanded postorbital bar, wide dorsal
exposure of the parietals, block-like crista oesophagea, and
more laterally-placed internal carotid canals of Eosimops.
Even the expanded area of the posterior median ridge differs in its details: in Eosimops it bears the anterior median
palatal ridges, whereas in Compsodon it merges with a
rounded depression at the front of the secondary palate.
Comparisons between C. helmoedi, Tropidostoma and
Australobarbarus deserve special attention for two reasons.
First, the three taxa are superficially very similar (Fig. 7)
and Brink & Keyser (1983) even considered C. helmoedi
to be a junior synonym of Tropidostoma microtrema (now
T. dubium; see Kammerer et al. 2011). Second, in his discussion of dicynodont phylogeny, van Hoepen (1934)
emphasized the similarities of the palates of Tropidostoma
and Compsodon (Australobarbarus had yet to be described;
Kurkin 2000) to those of ‘advanced’ dicynodonts such as
Dicynodon, as well as how they differed from the palates
of other dicynodonts that retained ‘postcanine’ teeth.
These similarities led van Hoepen to conclude that Compsodon and Tropidostoma were the closest of the toothed
dicynodonts to the ancestral stock of ‘Dicynodon-like’
taxa.

Despite this suggested similarity, a detailed comparison
of C. helmoedi with Tropidostoma (and Australobarbarus)
reveals numerous differences, particularly (and ironically)
in the palate. For example, Australobarbarus and Tropidostoma display a secondary palate morphology similar to
most other bidentalians, including paired anterior median
palatal ridges, a median posterior ridge, and the absence
of lateral anterior ridges and an embayment on the medial surface of the palatal rim. In contrast, C. helmoedi
lacks anterior median palatal ridges, has very prominent
lateral anterior palatal ridges, and has a well-developed
embayment of the palatal rim anterior to the caniniform
process. The palatine pads of Australobarbarus and Tropidostoma have a raised, rugose posterior area and a
smoother anterior area that is flush with the surface of
the premaxillary secondary palate, and a palatine foramen
is absent, whereas the palatine pads of C. helmoedi are
pierced by a palatine foramen and are smooth and of a
constant height for their entire length. The anterior pterygoid ramus of C. helmoedi bears a prominent triangular
keel, but those of Australobarbarus and Tropidostoma lack
a keel. Elsewhere in the skull, C. helmoedi has a single
nasal boss, swollen ‘lips’ partially surrounding the pineal
foramen, and a prominently raised alar process of the
prootic, whereas Australobarbarus and Tropidostoma possess paired nasal bosses, unornamented pineal foramina,
and lower, rounded alar processes. In the context of our
phylogenetic analysis, we interpret the similarities in the
general construction of the palate and the location of the
‘postcanine’ teeth observed by van Hoepen (1934) to
reflect the ancestral therochelonian Bauplan, instead of
synapomorphies that would unite C. helmoedi with Tropidostoma or Australobarbarus. The convergence in the
overall shape of the skull may have a functional explanation, perhaps indicating that the ecology of C. helmoedi
was similar to that of Australobarbarus and Tropidostoma
(also see below).
Based on these observations, we consider C. helmoedi
to represent a distinctive, well-defined morphotype, and
therefore a valid species. The discovery of the well-preserved Zambian specimens was key to the delineation of
this morphotype, providing a new search image when
assessing specimens in museum collections. Indeed, we
have already identified two previously unrecognized specimens of C. helmoedi from South Africa (i.e. RC 641, RC
736; see Kammerer et al. 2015a) and there may be others.

Stratigraphical and geographical ranges of Compsodon
The holotype of C. helmoedi was collected in rocks of the
Normandien Formation, near the city of Bloemfontein,
South Africa. Kitching (1977) expressed uncertainty about
the exact age of the type locality, suggesting that the

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

532

533

Skulls of Compsodon helmoedi van Hoepen 1934 and cryptodont dicynodonts showing convergences in skull shape and construction. A, skull of C. helmoedi (NHCC LB14) in dorsal view. B, skull of Tropidostoma dubium (CGS CM 86-573) in dorsal view. C,
skull of Australobarbarus kotelnitschi (PIN 4678/2) in dorsal view. D, skull of Oudenodon bainii (SAM-PK-K10418) in dorsal view. E,
transverse section through the skull of C. helmoedi (NHCC LB14) slightly posterior to the pineal foramen. F, transverse section
through the skull of O. bainii (NHCC LB631) slightly posterior to the pineal foramen. Anterior is into the page in panels E and F,
and the suture between the left postorbital and the parietal has been highlighted in each panel. Abbreviations: epi, epipterygoid; pa,
parietal; po, postorbital. Scale bars (A–D) represent 2 cm; E and F are not to scale.
FIG. 7.

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ANGIELCZYK & KAMMERER: REDESCRIPTION OF COMPSODON

PAPERS IN PALAEONTOLOGY, VOLUME 3

strata exposed could represent parts of his Cistecephalus
and/or Daptocephalus zones. Currently, the Normandien
Formation in this area is assigned to the Daptocephalus
AZ of Viglietti et al. (2016) (e.g. see maps in van der
Walt et al. 2010; Rubidge et al. 2016). The other two
Karoo Basin specimens of C. helmoedi (RC 641, RC 736)
were collected about 400 km to the south-west on farms
in the Graaff-Reinet District. These farms expose strata of
the Balfour Formation that can be assigned to the lower
Daptocephalus AZ (for RC 641) (Kammerer et al. 2015b;
also see Systematic Palaeontology above) and/or the
uppermost Cistecephalus AZ (for RC 736; available locality information does not include sufficient detail to localize this specimen to a specific stratigraphic horizon).
Given this information, it can be stated with a good
degree of certainty that C. helmoedi occurs in the Daptocephalus AZ in the Karoo Basin, but it is unclear how
much of the zone it ranges through and whether its range
extends down into the Cistecephalus AZ. Additional collecting of specimens from measured stratigraphic sections
will be necessary to resolve this issue. Even with the limited number of specimens available, however, it is clear
that C. helmoedi was a widespread, if apparently rare,
member of the late Permian Karoo dicynodont fauna.
Compsodon helmoedi seems to be more common in the
Luangwa Basin of Zambia. Far less collecting effort has
been expended there than in the Karoo, but three wellpreserved specimens already are known. The Luangwa
Basin specimens originated in a much smaller geographical area within North Luangwa National Park, but this
reflects in part the distribution of known fossiliferous
outcrops in the Luangwa Basin. Interestingly, no specimens of C. helmoedi are known from the ‘classic’ Upper
Luangwa Basin localities (e.g. Boonstra 1938; Drysdall &
Kitching 1963; Angielczyk et al. 2014a). This may partially reflect the different preservation style of specimens
from the Upper Luangwa Basin: specimens typically are
preserved in hematitic nodules, and even though many
such nodules have been collected, a much smaller number
have been prepared or are identifiable in unprepared
form. Reassessment of these unprepared specimens, now
that a detailed diagnosis for C. helmoedi exists, would be
a practical starting point for determining whether the species is present in the Upper Luangwa Basin.
The age of the Upper Madumabisa Mudstone Formation
in the Luangwa Basin has been a source of uncertainty (see
review in Angielczyk et al. 2014a). Based on the dicynodont
fauna of the Upper Madumabisa Mudstone, Angielczyk
et al. (2014a) suggested a correlation with the Cistecephalus
AZ of the South African Karoo Basin. Despite being represented in the Karoo at the time by a single specimen collected at a locality with a somewhat uncertain stratigraphic
position, C. helmoedi played an important role in that
correlation. Because specimens of Oudenodon and

Rhachiocephalus also were collected at the type locality
(Kitching 1977), Angielczyk et al. (2014a) treated the
stratigraphical range of C. helmoedi in the Karoo as if it
encompassed the overlap of the ranges of Oudenodon and
Rhachiocephalus, which at the time was considered to end
near the top of the Cistecephalus AZ (Smith & Keyser
1995). More recent research has revised the stratigraphical
range of Rhachiocephalus so that it is now considered to
extend up into the lower Daptocephalus AZ (Viglietti et al.
2016). Viglietti et al. (2016; also see Smith et al. 2012) presented a similar revision to the range of the other known
rhachiocephalid genus, Kitchinganomodon. When combined with the revised occurrence information presented
here for Compsodon, three of the five main dicynodonts
that Angielczyk et al. (2014a) used in their correlation now
have ranges that include the lower Daptocephalus AZ as well
as the Cistecephalus AZ. Only Odontocyclops and Endothiodon are still considered to be present in the Cistecephalus
AZ but not the lower Daptocephalus AZ (e.g. Angielczyk
2002a; Smith et al. 2012; Boos et al. 2013). We continue to
favour a correlation between the Upper Madumabisa Mudstone Formation in the Luangwa Basin with the Cistecephalus AZ because of the presence of Odontocyclops and
Endothiodon in the former unit, but this correlation would
clearly benefit from better chronostratigraphic control on
the age of the Madumabisa Mudstone. Indeed, such data
would provide important insight into whether the seemingly disjunct stratigraphical ranges noted for some taxa in
the Luangwa and Ruhuhu basins compared to the Karoo
Basin (Sidor et al. 2010; Angielczyk et al. 2014a, b) stem
from diachroneity among the deposits or differences in the
real temporal ranges of taxa in the various basins.
Angielczyk et al. (2014a) noted that the dicynodont
fauna of the Luangwa Basin was more similar to that of
the Karoo Basin than to that of the Ruhuhu Basin,
despite the much greater geographical proximity of the
Luangwa and Ruhuhu basins both now and in the Permian. Compsodon helmoedi contributes to this pattern
with its presence in the Karoo and Luangwa basins and
its apparent absence in the Ruhuhu Basin, particularly
now that the potential record noted by Angielczyk & Cox
(2015) appears unlikely to truly represent Compsodon.
The reason why C. helmoedi seemingly failed to disperse
into the Ruhuhu Basin is unclear, particularly since the
closely-related and similarly-sized taxon Dicynodontoides
did accomplish this feat (Angielczyk et al. 2009; Fr€
obisch
2009).
Curiously, small Permian dicynodonts seem to have
been more effective dispersers than many of their larger
relatives (Angielczyk et al. 2014a; Kammerer et al. 2016)
and among small dicynodonts, emydopoids are particularly noteworthy for their broad geographical ranges. For
example, the emydopoid genera Compsodon, Dicynodontoides, Emydops, Kombuisia and Myosaurus are all known

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

534

to occur in multiple geographically-separated basins (e.g.
Fr€
obisch 2009; Angielczyk et al. 2009, 2014a; Fr€
obisch
et al., 2010). Each known cistecephalid species is a basinal
endemic (Fr€
obisch 2009; Angielczyk et al. 2014a; Kammerer et al. 2016), but the clade as a whole is widely distributed across Gondwana despite comprising small
fossorial animals. Given their apparent cosmopolitanism,
the absence of emydopoids in Laurasia and in South
America is noteworthy, but it is hard to rule out that this
is a sampling artifact, since Permian dicynodont fossils
are rarer in these areas and they have not been subject to
the same collecting effort as many of the main Gondwanan basins, particularly those of southern Africa. It also
is possible that ecological roles played by emydopoids in
Gondwana were filled by other dicynodonts in the northern hemisphere. For example, the Russian species Elph
borealis (Kurkin 1999; Angielczyk & Kurkin 2003a) and
the Chinese species Daqingshanodon limbus (Zhu 1989;
Kammerer et al. 2011), which are both members of
Bidentalia, fall within the size range typical of at least the
larger emydopoids.

Phylogenetic relationships
Compsodon is strongly supported as an emydopoid in our
analyses (see Results above). Within Emydopoidea, relationships are generally similar to those of previous analyses, although Kingoriidae falls in a more basal position
within Kistecephalia (sensu Kammerer & Angielczyk 2009)
than Digalodon, in contrast to the more basal position for
Digalodon recovered by Kammerer et al. (2015a). Our
analysis corroborates Kammerer et al.’s (2016) finding
that Sauroscaptor is the most basal cistecephalid.
In all of our analyses Compsodon was recovered as the
sister-taxon of Emydops, in which case it would be a
member of Emydopidae sensu Kammerer & Angielczyk
(2009) (although under Art. 24.1 of the ICZN, the senior
name for this family would then be Compsodontidae).
However, there is reason to be skeptical of this relationship, considering the characters supporting it. The state
present in Compsodon and Emydops for character 5 (state
1: posterior median ridge present with a flattened,
expanded anterior area) has a complex history near the
base of Therochelonia: it is also found immediately outside of Emydopoidea in taxa such as Brachyprosopus, Pristerodon, pylaecephalids and at least some specimens of
Endothiodon bathystoma. The presence of the derived state
in both Niassodon and kistecephalians causes this state to
be reconstructed as a Compsodon + Emydops synapomorphy, but its widespread distribution in more basal dicynodonts means that its potential status as a therochelonian
symplesiomorphy cannot be dismissed out of hand. The
optimization of character 23 (state 0: maxillary non-

535

caniniform teeth located near lateral margin of maxilla)
as a synapomorphy of the Compsodon + Emydops clade,
and also a reversal from a hypothetical toothless therochelonian ancestor, is suspect for two reasons. First, the
inferred (toothless) ancestral state for the common ancestor of Therochelonia is an artefact of Emydops and Compsodon being coded with a different character state than
most non-therochelonians, because of the more lateral
placement of their maxillary postcanines. If a single state
is used for all dicynodonts with maxillary ‘postcanines,’ a
toothed therochelonian ancestor is equally parsimonious
as a toothless one. Second, the current topology and optimization implies that Compsodon + Emydops re-evolved
teeth from a toothless ancestor, yet this is biologically
improbable. Not only is independent tooth loss one of
the most pervasive evolutionary trends in Dicynodontia,
there are very few examples of vertebrate taxa re-evolving
teeth in an edentulous lineage. Character 32 is highly
homoplastic in emydopoids; the state present in Compsodon and Emydops (state 1: ventral edge of caniniform
process at the same level to slightly posterior to anterior
orbital margin) is also present in Kombuisia (but not
Dicynodontoides), Cistecephalus (but not the other cistecephalids) and Myosaurus. Finally, character 112 (state 1:
lateral edge of paroccipital process drawn into sharp posteriorly-directed process that is distinctly offset from the
surface of the occipital plate present) may be more
broadly distributed in emydopoids than our current
matrix (in which it is only coded for Compsodon and
Emydops) indicates. A distinct, albeit more weakly-developed, eminence on the paroccipital process is also present
in Dicynodontoides (Cox 1959) and Digalodon (Kammerer
et al. 2015a). The same morphology is present in Emydorhinus (CFK, pers. obs.), a Permian taxon that requires
redescription and is not included in our current analysis,
but which shows numerous similarities to the kistecephalian genus Myosaurus. Indeed, several superficially
Emydops-like emydopoid genera (e.g. Emydorhinus, Palemydops) have, like Compsodon, not been seriously reconsidered in a modern phylogenetic framework and require
further study. These taxa will hopefully prove useful in
resolving the topology within Emydopoidea, as they show
a combination of plesiomorphic emydopoid and derived
kistecephalian features.
As regards anomodont phylogeny in general, the results
of our phylogenetic analyses broadly mirror recent studies
(e.g. Kammerer et al. 2011, 2013, 2015a, 2016; Castanhinha et al. 2013; Angielczyk & Rubidge 2013; Angielczyk
& Cox 2015; Cox & Angielczyk 2015; Angielczyk et al.
2016; Boos et al. 2016; Kammerer & Smith 2017; Olroyd
et al. in press) but also underline important areas of continuing uncertainty. In particular, the base of Therochelonia remains one of the most problematic portions of the
anomodont tree. While there are many individual points

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ANGIELCZYK & KAMMERER: REDESCRIPTION OF COMPSODON

PAPERS IN PALAEONTOLOGY, VOLUME 3

of disagreement between published topologies for Therochelonia, four major issues underlie much of the instability in this part of the tree: (1) are endothiodonts
therochelonians? (2) do pylaecephalids and emydopoids
form a clade to the exclusion of other dicynodonts? (3) is
Cryptodontia monophyletic? and (4) do the ‘elphids’
(Elph, Interpresosaurus and Katumbia) represent dicynodontoids or basal bidentalians? It is worth examining
each of these issues in further detail to highlight areas of
dicynodont phylogeny in particular need of additional
research attention.
Endothiodon has, since its initial description (Owen
1876), been a problematic outlier among dicynodonts.
Seeley (1892) did not consider Endothiodon to be a dicynodont at all, but instead a member of a separate group of
herbivorous therapsids more closely related to theriodonts. Seeley’s conclusion is somewhat understandable
given the lack of knowledge on basal anomodonts at the
time: the absence of tusks, extensive maxillary, premaxillary and dentary dentition, and relatively short secondary
palate all make Endothiodon superficially appear more like
a ‘typical’ early therapsid than a dicynodont. Pre-cladistic
treatments of dicynodont phylogeny (e.g. Broom 1905;
van Hoepen 1934; Toerien 1953) tended to regard
Endothiodon as one of the most ‘primitive’ dicynodonts,
largely on the basis of the features mentioned above
(although even as early as Broom (1905), the absence of
the tusk in Endothiodon was regarded as a loss from a
tusked ancestor). The earliest cladistic treatments of
dicynodonts generally reflected these older ideas: Cluver
& King (1983; see also King 1988, 1990) reconstructed
Endothiodontoidea (in their usage, consisting of Endothiodon, Pachytegos and Chelydontops) as the secondearliest-diverging clade of dicynodonts, with only Eodicynodon in a more basal position, and Angielczyk (2002b)
discussed some topologies in which Endothiodon was
basal to Eodicynodon. A number of computer-assisted
phylogenetic analyses of dicynodonts have recovered a
roughly similar position for Endothiodon, albeit with
more recently-described basal taxa (e.g. Colobodectes, Lanthanostegus) intervening between it and Eodicynodon (e.g.
Kammerer et al. 2011, 2013; Castanhinha et al. 2013;
although in some analyses Pylaecephalidae is recovered in
a more basal position as well, see Discussion below).
However, several lines of evidence now indicate that the
seemingly ‘primitive’ features of Endothiodon represent
reversals from a more typical dicynodont ancestor (Nehls
et al. 2014; Angielczyk & Cox 2015; Cox & Angielczyk
2015; Olroyd et al. in press). Some of these have been suspected for some time; as mentioned above, the absence of
tusks in Endothiodon bathystoma has long been regarded as
a secondary loss, a suspicion confirmed by the recent discovery of a new, possibly stratigraphically earlier species of
Endothiodon (E. tolani) that retains tusks (Cox &

Angielczyk 2015). Additional discoveries of small, tusked
dicynodonts exhibiting some of the features previously
regarded as autapomorphic for Endothiodon have further
helped to break up the morphological ‘long branch’ for that
genus. As an important example, Olroyd et al. (in press)
provided a redescription of the problematic middle Permian dicynodont Abajudon kaayai from Tanzania and
Zambia, demonstrating that this taxon had Endothiodonlike cranial morphology and arguing that Abajudon represents a true endothiodont sensu Kammerer & Angielczyk
(2009). Olroyd et al. (in press) also showed that this basal
endothiodont exhibits a number of characters previously
considered to be synapomorphies of Emydopoidea and,
indeed, their analysis placed Endothiodontia on the stem of
Emydopoidea. Our current topology places Endothiodontia outside of Therochelonia, but we did not include Abajudon in our analysis. This rapid advancement in our
knowledge of Endothiodon and its allies is exciting, but
indicative that their relationships are far from settled (also
see Angielczyk et al. 2016). Support values in both the current analysis and that of Olroyd et al. (in press) are very
weak, with only ~1 step required to pull Endothiodon and
Niassodon (and Abajudon in the latter analysis) into or out
of Therochelonia. And while Brachyprosopus and Abajudon
have been subject to recent redescriptions, Pristerodon
(usually considered to be one of the best-known Permian
dicynodonts) needs revision. This taxon is probably overlumped, and its current codings may be chimaerical to
some extent. Additionally, postcranial anatomy in both
Pristerodon and Endothiodon remains poorly described,
despite the high importance of postcranial characters in
establishing pylaecephalid and emydopoid relationships
(for which see below).
Pylaecephalidae contains some of the best-known
dicynodont taxa (particularly the hyper-abundant Permian species Diictodon feliceps) but despite the exhaustive
anatomical detail available for this clade, its phylogenetic
position remains remarkably labile. Cluver & King (1983)
initially reconstructed Pylaecephalidae (‘Robertoidea’ in
their usage) as the sister-taxon of Emydopoidea in their
hand-drawn cladogram of dicynodont relationships. However, early computer-assisted phylogenetic analyses of
dicynodonts (Angielczyk 2001, 2002a, 2007; Modesto
et al. 2002; Angielczyk & Kurkin 2003a, b; Damiani et al.
2007; Fr€
obisch 2007; Fr€
obisch & Reisz 2008; Angielczyk &
Rubidge 2010, 2013) consistently pulled these groups
apart, instead finding Pylaecephalidae (usually called
‘Robertiidae’ in this literature) to be one of the earliestdiverging clades of dicynodonts. Unexpectedly, Pylaecephalidae jumped back to being the sister-taxon of Emydopoidea in the later, substantially expanded analysis of
Kammerer et al. (2011). The majority of subsequent analyses (all of which are based on the underlying data matrix
of Kammerer et al. 2011) have also recovered a clade

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

536

made up of Pylacephalidae + Emydopoidea (Kammerer
et al. 2013, 2015a, 2016; Castanhinha et al. 2013; Cox &
Angielczyk 2015; Angielczyk et al. 2016; Kammerer &
Smith 2017). However, in several of the most recent iterations of the analysis, Pylaecephalidae has returned to its
former, more basal position (Angielczyk & Cox 2015;
Boos et al. 2016; Olroyd et al. in press) and in the current analysis we also find Pylaecephalidae to fall outside
of Therochelonia.
Several issues underlie this lability in pylaecephalid
placement. Chief among them is Diictodon itself, which
exhibits a confounding mosaic of primitive and derived
characters. Non-Diictodon pylaecephalids (of which Robertia is the classic example) generally display a suite of
primitive dicynodont skull characters (e.g. broad
intertemporal region, extensive maxillary and dentary
tooth rows). By contrast, the general morphology of Diictodon’s skull more closely resembles that of an ‘advanced’
dicynodont (e.g. narrow intertemporal region, complete
loss of the non-tusk dentition). It is telling that the morphotype we now call Diictodon feliceps was considered to
be part of the genus Dicynodon until the revision of Cluver & Hotton (1981), long after taxa like Oudenodon
(Keyser 1975), Tropidostoma (Keyser 1973) and even
Dicynodontoides (partim, called ‘Kingoria’ at the time; Cox
1959) were recognized as being distinct from Dicynodon.
Despite the seemingly ‘advanced’ cranial morphology of
Diictodon, however, the monophyly of Pylaecephalidae
has never been challenged since the advent of dicynodont
cladistics; a large number of synapomorphies support the
grouping of Diictodon with Eosimops, Prosictodon and
Robertia (Kammerer & Angielczyk 2009; Angielczyk &
Rubidge 2013). What has happened instead is that the
derived features of Diictodon tend to pull the entirety of
Pylaecephalidae ‘higher’ into the dicynodont tree than
where it would be otherwise. Because Diictodon is the
most morphologically thoroughly-known dicynodont and
is more completely coded than any other pylaecephalid in
phylogenetic analyses, it plays an outsized role in determining relationships for the group. Although we suspect
that the ‘advanced’ features of Diictodon represent convergence with therochelonians, this has proven difficult to
demonstrate analytically; in many analyses (e.g. Kammerer et al. 2011) it is equally parsimonious for these features to be ancestral for Therochelonia and then reversed
in the non-Diictodon pylaecephalids.
Various avenues of future research can help to deal
with this problem. First, this issue is closely related to
other sources of instability at the base of Therochelonia,
as discussed above in reference to Endothiodon. If it can
be demonstrated that endothiodonts share a robust suite
of synapomorphies with therochelonians to the exclusion
of the non-Diictodon pylaecephalids (e.g. Olroyd et al. in
press), the ability of Diictodon alone to pull the clade up

537

into Therochelonia will be diminished. Second, this issue
is also related to instability within Pylaecephalidae: for
reversal to be as parsimonious as convergence, Eosimops,
Prosictodon and Robertia have to form a clade to the
exclusion of Diictodon (as recovered by Kammerer et al.
2011, 2013, 2015a, 2016; Castanhinha et al. 2013; Cox &
Angielczyk 2015; Angielczyk et al. 2016; Kammerer &
Smith 2017). However, studies focusing on pylaecephalid
anatomy have generally noted that Prosictodon is more
similar to Diictodon than to other pylaecephalids (Angielczyk & Rubidge 2010, 2013; see also Angielczyk & Cox
2015), and a sister-taxon relationship between these genera is recovered when Pylaecephalidae falls outside of
Therochelonia (Angielczyk 2007; Angielczyk & Rubidge
2013; Angielczyk & Cox 2015; Boos et al. 2016; Olroyd
et al. in press; this study). More work on resolving intrapylaecephalid relationships is needed, particularly now
that recent collecting in the Tapinocephalus AZ has
yielded well-preserved new material of Prosictodon and
Robertia (CFK & KDA, pers. obs.).
Another problem is our lopsided knowledge of pylaecephalid vs emydopoid postcranial anatomy. Several of
the characters supporting a Pylaecephalidae + Emydopoidea clade are postcranial, and while some of these
appear compelling in being unique to pylaecephalids and
emydopoids among dicynodonts (e.g. the presence of an
ectepicondylar foramen on the humerus), the limited current state of knowledge of dicynodont postcranial variation provides reason for doubt. Pylaecephalid postcrania
have been thoroughly described (King 1981b; Ray &
Chinsamy 2003; Angielczyk & Rubidge 2013), and nearlycomplete postcranial skeletons are known for three of the
four recognized pylaecephalid species (Diictodon feliceps,
Eosimops newtoni and Robertia broomiana). By contrast,
the postcrania of emydopoids are generally poorly known.
Articulated postcranial skeletons of several of these taxa
(e.g. Emydops, Emydorhinus, Myosaurus) are present in
Karoo collections, but for the most part are underprepared and/or have yet to be described in detail (Kammerer et al. 2011; Aschenbach et al. 2014). Emydopoid
taxa that have received thorough postcranial descriptions
(e.g. Cistecephalus microrhinus (Cluver 1978) and Dicynodontoides (Cox 1959; King 1985; Angielczyk et al. 2009))
tend to be highly specialized, and are unlikely to represent
the basal condition for Emydopoidea. Given the amount
of missing postcranial data in this part of the tree, it is
hard to be confident that the shared postcranial features
between pylaecephalids and the small sampling of emydopoids do not represent homoplasy; more information
on emydopoid skeletal anatomy is required.
Cryptodontia has been recognized as an important
dicynodont group since the nineteenth century. Although
Owen (1860) initially established this taxon for Oudenodon alone, Owen’s conceptions of dicynodont genera

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ANGIELCZYK & KAMMERER: REDESCRIPTION OF COMPSODON

PAPERS IN PALAEONTOLOGY, VOLUME 3

were substantially broader in scope than those of later
authors, and his ‘Oudenodon’ contained what we would
now consider multiple families of dicynodonts. In particular, Owen’s (1876) ‘Oudenodon’ also included species
currently classified as Rhachiocephalus (initially separated
as a subgenus by Seeley 1898), and a close relationship
between oudenodontids and rhachiocephalids has been
recognized by many subsequent authors (e.g. van Hoepen
1934; Toerien 1953; Keyser 1975; Keyser & Cruickshank
1979; Cluver & King 1983; King 1988, 1990; Angielczyk
2001).
The inclusion of geikiids (Aulacephalodon and allies) in
Cryptodontia has been more controversial. A close relationship between Aulacephalodon and Oudenodon was initially proposed by van Hoepen (1934), but this proposal
was discounted by most subsequent authors, in large part
due to the presence of massive tusks in the former taxon.
Notably, Toerien (1953) proposed a conception of
Cryptodontia basically identical to its modern usage, containing representatives of Oudenodontidae (represented
by Oudenodon), Rhachiocephalidae (represented by genera
now considered synonymous with Rhachiocephalus) and
Geikiidae (represented by Pelanomodon), but explicitly
excluding Aulacephalodon because it had tusks (despite
the extensive similarities between this genus and Pelanomodon). Early cladistic analyses of dicynodonts recovered
Aulacephalodon and Pelanomodon as sister-taxa, but did
not find this clade to be closely related to oudenodontids
and rhachiocephalids (Cluver & King 1983). King’s
(1988) ‘Cryptodontinae’ included oudenodontids and
rhachiocephalids (in the form of the tribes ‘Tropidostomini’, ‘Oudenodontini’ and ‘Pelorocyclopini’) but not
geikiids (treated as a separate subfamily, ‘Aulacephalodontinae’), which were considered to be more closely related to dicynodontoids. Similar topologies were
recovered in the earliest computer-assisted cladistic analyses of dicynodont phylogeny (Angielczyk 2001, 2002a).
Angielczyk & Kurkin (2003a) were the first to analytically
recover a cryptodont clade containing oudenodontids,
rhachiocephalids and geikiids to the exclusion of dicynodontoids, and this group has also been recovered by
most subsequent analyses (with the exception of the
highly aberrant topology of Damiani et al. (2007), who
recovered oudenodontids and geikiids nested deeply
within Dicynodontoidea and Rhachiocephalus as the sister-taxon of Cistecephalus + Myosaurus). For instance, the
primary analysis of Kammerer et al. (2011) produced a
monophyletic Cryptodontia composed of the three ‘core’
families (Oudenodontidae, Rhachiocephalidae and Geikiidae) as well as four genera falling outside of these
(Daqingshanodon, Idelesaurus, Keyseria and Odontocyclops).
Most analyses based on the Kammerer et al. (2011)
matrix have recovered a monophyletic Cryptodontia

(most recently Kammerer & Smith 2017), but this clade
has consistently been poorly supported. In the current
analysis we recover a paraphyletic Cryptodontia, a result
previously obtained by Boos et al. (2016) and Olroyd
et al. (in press), albeit with variations in the positions of
the component taxa (note that when we discuss ‘monophyletic Cryptodontia’ here, we are referring to
Cryptodontia in the sense of including all three of the
‘core’ families; strictly speaking Cryptodontia will always
be monophyletic as defined by Kammerer & Angielczyk
(2009), although in many topologies it then becomes
compositionally identical to Oudenodontidae). Troublingly, the newfound paraphyly of cryptodonts is not
merely a reversal to older topologies in which geikiids fall
out closer to dicynodontoids. Although this would be
expected based on the dicynodontoid-like characters present in geikiids (e.g. the presence of a labial fossa
bounded by palatine, jugal and maxilla), this is not consistent (in the analysis of Boos et al. (2016), for example,
Rhachiocephalidae is more closely related to Dicynodon
than Geikiidae). This high level of variability is indicative
of a more complex set of problems underlying this part
of the tree than is the case for pylaecephalids for example,
whose phylogenetic position is not settled, but is limited
to two competing options.
One problem is that the various Permian cryptodont
families and dicynodontoids seem to have all been evolving large body sizes simultaneously (there is a marked
increase in dicynodont body size starting in the Tropidostoma AZ and continuing through the Cistecephalus AZ;
Angielczyk & Walsh 2008; Kammerer & Smith 2017) and
this probably involved substantial parallelism, as reflected
in the fact that all possible relationships between these
subclades incur significant homoplasy. Another problem
is the extreme instability of a number of dicynodont taxa
that are clearly bidentalian but are not clearly referable to
any of the three ‘core’ cryptodont families (or Dicynodontoidea). These taxa (e.g. Basilodon, Idelesaurus and
Syops) are relatively poorly-studied and in several cases
based on highly incomplete material; their inclusion in
analyses adds further instability to an already weak section of the tree. Other taxa (e.g. Daqingshanodon, Keyseria) are so generalized that they provide essentially no
tree structure in our analyses; they are usually recovered
as the most basal cryptodonts when Cryptodontia is
monophyletic (e.g. Kammerer et al. 2011), but they
become wildcards when Cryptodontia is paraphyletic (e.g.
in the analysis of Boos et al. (2016), they are recovered as
dicynodontoids, whereas in Angielczyk et al. (in press)
they are the most basal bidentalians). Finally, there are
compositional problems even within the ‘core’ cryptodont
families. Tropidostoma and Australobarbarus are extremely
similar to Oudenodon (to the point where the former
genus has at times been considered directly ancestral to

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

538

the latter; see discussion in Botha & Angielczyk 2007);
these taxa have been recovered in a monophyletic Oudenodontidae in all recent analyses of dicynodont phylogeny.
However, Tropidostoma and Australobarbarus are unique
among bidentalians in retaining ‘postcanine’ dentition,
and combined with their early appearance in the fossil
record (they may be the earliest known bidentalians,
depending on whether the middle Permian Rastodon is a
member of this clade) it is easy to develop suspicions that
they represent an earlier-diverging, more ‘primitive’ lineage than the other cryptodonts and dicynodontoids. For
example, in our current analyses Tropidostoma and Australobarbarus are reconstructed as having re-evolved maxillary ‘postcanines’ from a toothless ancestor, but this
seems biologically unlikely (see above).
The ‘elphids’ are composed of a set of small, poorlyknown bidentalian dicynodonts from Russia (Elph, Interpresosaurus) and Tanzania (Katumbia). Kurkin (2010)
established ‘Elphinae’ as a subfamily of Dicynodontidae
containing Elph and Interpresosaurus. In some phylogenetic analyses, Elph and Interpresosaurus form a clade with
Katumbia (e.g. Boos et al. 2016; Kammerer & Smith
2017) for which the family name Elphidae Kurkin, 2010
would be available (by Principle of Coordination, Art.
36.1 of the ICZN). However, just as frequently these taxa
form a polytomy (e.g. Angielczyk 2007; Kammerer et al.
2011) so we use ‘elphids’ here as an informal catchall
term. Regardless of whether they form a clade or not, the
‘elphids’ as a set tend to occupy two possible parts of
dicynodont treespace: either as the most basal dicynodontoids or as basal bidentalians, outside of the Cryptodontia + Dicynodontoidea split. The position of these taxa
has major implications for ancestral state reconstruction
of both morphology and biogeography in Bidentalia.
The ‘elphids’ have broadly Dicynodon-like cranial anatomy (e.g. narrow intertemporal bar, relatively low lateral
dentary shelf, tall caniniform process), so if they are basal
bidentalians this implies that ‘dicynodontoid-like’ features
are ancestral for Bidentalia, and ‘cryptodont-like’ features
are more likely to represent the synapomorphies of a
monophyletic Cryptodontia. If they are basal dicynodontoids, however, these features resolve as synapomorphies
for Dicynodontoidea, and the likelihood of a Tropidostoma-like animal representing the ancestral bidentalian
morphotype increases. Regarding geography, a dicynodontoid placement for the ‘elphids’ tends to support a
northern hemisphere origin for Dicynodontoidea (Angielczyk & Kurkin 2003a), which could help explain the
lengthy ghost lineage of this clade in the Karoo Basin
(Kammerer & Smith 2017). Our current analysis recovers
‘elphids’ as basal bidentalians, a position supported primarily by their possession of bidentalian characters of the
palate, basicranium and mandible, and the lack of ‘cryptodont’ characters such as a postcaniniform keel and

539

paired nasal bosses, which are reconstructed as ancestral
for ‘higher’ bidentalians because of the paraphyly of
Cryptodontia. When Cryptodontia is constrained to be
monophyletic, the latter characters optimize differently on
the tree (e.g. the postcaniniform keel is reconstructed as a
cryptodont synapomorphy) and the ‘elphids’ are positioned at the base of Dicynodontoidea as a result.
In addition to the previously known issues in anomodont phylogeny discussed above, the consensus topology in
our unconstrained analysis also produced some novel positions for certain taxa. Among basal (i.e. non-dicynodont)
anomodonts, both Patranomodon and the clade of Anomocephalus + Tiarajudens were recovered as chainosaurs (i.e.
anomodonts more closely related to dicynodonts than
venyukovioids). Previously, Anomocephalus + Tiarajudens
(the Anomocephaloidea of Cisneros et al. 2011) were consistently recovered outside of the clade containing
Venyukovioidea + Chainosauria (e.g. Cisneros et al. 2011,
2015), making them the most basal anomodonts other
than Biseridens. Patranomodon was recovered outside of
Venyukovioidea + Chainosauria by Kammerer et al.
(2011) and most subsequent analyses, but a basal chainosaur position for this taxon was previously recovered by
Liu et al. (2010), Cisneros et al. (2011, 2015) and Fr€
obisch
& Reisz (2011). In terms of general skull morphology,
Patranomodon is strikingly similar to the ‘dromasaurs’ (the
grade of Karoo basal anomodonts consisting of Galechirus,
Galeops and Galepus) and its basal position in published
phylogenies was based mainly on its extremely plesiomorphic jaw morphology and postcranium (Rubidge & Hopson 1996). However, given demonstrable homoplasy in the
jaw between the venyukovioids and dicynodonts (Angielczyk 2004) and poor understanding of postcranial anatomy
in most non-‘dromasaur’ basal anomodonts, there is room
for doubt. The new positions of the anomocephaloids and
Patranomodon are intuitively pleasing from the standpoint
of general skull anatomy: these taxa have relatively short,
tall skulls (with enormously expanded caniniform teeth in
Tiarajudens, although these are probably not homologous
with dicynodont tusks), whereas venyukovioid cranial proportions are more similar to those of Biseridens and even
dinocephalians. Less pleasing is Galepus (possibly the only
late Permian ‘dromasaur’, although its exact strata of origin
are debated; see Reisz & Modesto 2007) falling out as the
most basal chainosaur, whereas previously this taxon consistently formed the sister-taxon of Galechirus (e.g. Kammerer et al. 2011; Boos et al. 2016).
A variety of novel relationships are also recovered
within Dicynodontoidea in the current analysis. Those
pertaining to kannemeyeriiforms have been discussed in a
separate paper (Angielczyk et al. in press) and are not
repeated here. Relationships among the basal (i.e. nonTriassic) dicynodontoids have been extremely unstable
since the earliest computer-assisted phylogenetic analyses

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ANGIELCZYK & KAMMERER: REDESCRIPTION OF COMPSODON

PAPERS IN PALAEONTOLOGY, VOLUME 3

of dicynodonts (compare the topologies in Angielczyk &
Kurkin 2003a, Angielczyk 2007, Kammerer et al. 2011
and Kammerer & Smith 2017, for instance) so changes to
prior topologies should not be given particular weight.
What is worth noting, however, is that the fundamental
structure of basal dicynodontoid topology varies greatly
based on whether Cryptodontia is monophyletic. In the
consensus topology of our primary analysis (with a paraphyletic Cryptodontia), dicynodontoids resolve into two
major clades (Lystrosauridae, Kannemeyeriiformes) and
the paraphyletic assemblage of most Permian dicynodontoids includes two subclades of four taxa each. When
Cryptodontia is constrained to be monophyletic, however,
the dicynodontoid portion of the tree becomes more
pectinate, with the Permian dicynodontoids resolving as a
grade outside of Lystrosauridae + Kannemeyeriiformes.
This result highlights the degree to which instability in
cryptodonts has serious downstream consequences for
bidentalian phylogeny in general, and the importance of
additional work on those taxa.

Emydopoid disparity
Compared to its sister taxon Bidentalia, Emydopoidea is
not a particularly diverse clade in terms of species richness. In our phylogenetic analysis it includes 10 OTUs
compared to the 63 OTUs of Bidentalia, and the addition of other putative emydopoids such as Cryptocynodon simus and the tusked cistecephalid from the
Luangwa Basin briefly described by Angielczyk et al.
(2014a) does little to offset this discrepancy. Despite
their low species richness, emydopoids achieved an
impressive level of morphological disparity (e.g. Ruta
et al. 2013, but note that their disparity value for Emydopoidea also includes the pylaecephalids, which we
recovered here as a separate clade). This is perhaps best
shown by the cistecephalids. Although other dicynodonts
were capable of burrowing (Smith 1987; Groenewald
1991; Retallack et al. 2003; Bordy et al. 2011; but see
Modesto & Botha-Brink 2010) cistecephalids adapted
their skulls and postcranial skeletons for a specialized
fossorial lifestyle to a degree unmatched by other dicynodonts (Cox 1972; Cluver 1974a, 1978; Nasterlack et al.
2012; Laaß 2015). The postcranial skeleton of Dicynodontoides is also very distinctive, particularly the pelvis
and hindlimb, which are extensively modified to accommodate a very upright limb posture (Cox 1959; King
1985; Angielczyk et al. 2009).
This morphological and functional disparity among
emydopoids carries over into their feeding systems. Taxa
such as Emydops, Myosaurus and Digalodon retain a relatively broad temporal bar with a wide central exposure of
the parietals. This morphology is similar to that seen in

the earliest dicynodonts, such as Eodicynodon oosthuizeni
(e.g. Rubidge 1990) and is likely to indicate a similar
arrangement of jaw muscles and comparable jaw function
(Cluver 1974b). The temporal bar is further widened in
the cistecephalids, such that the dorsal exposure of the
temporal opening begins to be reduced, and Cluver
(1974a) suggested that this might be indicative of an
increased emphasis on transverse movements of the
mandible in the clade. The skulls of the kingoriids Dicynodontoides and Kombuisia were modified in an opposite
fashion, evolving a narrow, crest-like temporal bar in
which the postorbitals extensively overlap the parietals.
The morphology of Dicynodontoides is reminiscent of that
seen in basal dicynodontoids, whereas that of Kombuisia
is similar to the morphology in shansiodontid kannemeyeriiforms, with postorbitals that do not extend the full
length of the temporal bar. This morphological convergence suggests a similarity in jaw function, but the analogy is not perfect. Dicynodontoides and Kombuisia retain
ancestral emydopoid characters such as reduced anterior
median palatal ridges, shovel-shaped dentary symphysis,
absence of a posterior dentary sulcus, and prominent lateral dentary shelf, which are not seen in basal dicynodontoids or shansiodontids; this probably indicates that
dietary differences existed between the clades. Compsodon
helmoedi further expands the cranial disparity of Emydopoidea by converging on a skull shape similar to that
of cryptodonts, particularly Oudenodon, Tropidostoma and
Australobarbarus (Fig. 7). Not only is the construction of
the temporal bar very similar, with broad, dorsolaterallyfacing postorbitals and a narrower midline exposure of
the parietals, the overall shape and proportions of the
skulls are quite similar as well. As with the kingoriid
example, C. helmoedi differs from cryptodonts in the
details of its secondary palate morphology, among other
characters, but it represents a definite departure from the
plesiomorphic emydopoid skull plan represented by Emydops.
Given that Emydopoidea was clearly capable of generating morphological disparity, including both unique
skull morphologies and morphologies that converge with
those of other diverse anomodont clades, a puzzling question is why the clade was not able to produce a greater
number of species. This pattern underscores the general
decoupling of morphological disparity and species richness in Anomodontia described by Ruta et al. (2013).
Acknowledgements. We thank J. Museba, K. Mwamulowe and C.
Chipote (NHCC) for their assistance in obtaining our research
and export permits, and in carrying out our fieldwork. N. Barbolini, C. Beightol, A. Goulding, J. Menke, S. Meyers, S. Nesbitt,
B. Peecook, C. Sidor, R. Smith, J. S. Steyer, N. Tabor, S. Tolan,
and R. Whatley also made numerous contributions to fieldwork
in Zambia and subsequent research. Funding for fieldwork was

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

540

provided by the National Geographic Committee for Exploration
and Research (CRE 8571-08 to J. S. Steyer), the National Science
Foundation (EAR-1337291 to KDA; EAR-1337569 to C. Sidor),
and The Field Museum IDP Foundation, Inc. African Training
and African Partners programs (to KDA). Research travel for
CFK was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(KA 3144-1). A. Shinya, L. Herzog, and C. Van Beek prepared
the specimens, and M. Donnelly drafted the drawings in Figures 1–3. J. Lungmus assisted with CT-scanning of NHCC LB14
and LB631. J. Botha-Brink and E. Butler arranged the loan of
NMQR 1460 to KDA. Comments from three anonymous referees improved the quality of the manuscript.

DATA ARCHIVING STATEMENT
Data for this study are available in the Dryad Digital Repository:
https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.fq3dq

Editor. Andrew Smith

REFERENCES
A N G I E L C Z Y K , K. D. 2001. Preliminary phylogenetic analysis and stratigraphic congruence of the dicynodont anomodonts (Synapsida: Therapsida). Palaeontologia Africana, 37,
53–79.
- 2002a. Redescription, phylogenetic position, and stratigraphic significance of the dicynodont genus Odontocyclops
(Synapsida: Anomodontia). Journal of Paleontology, 76, 1047–
1059.
-2002b. A character-based method for measuring the fit of a
cladogram to the fossil record. Systematic Biology, 51, 176–
191.
-2004. Phylogenetic evidence for and implications of a dual
origin of propaliny in anomodont therapsids. Paleobiology, 30,
268–296.
-2007. New specimens of the Tanzanian dicynodont “Cryptocynodon” parringtoni von Huene, 1942 (Therapsida,
Anomodontia), with an expanded analysis of Permian dicynodont phylogeny. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 27, 116–
131.
-and C O X , C. B. 2015. Distinctive emydopoid dicynodont
(Therapsida, Anomodontia) mandibles form the Permian
Ruhuhu and Usili formations (Songea Group), Ruhuhu Basin,
Tanzania. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 35, e1008699.
-and K A M M E R E R , C. F. 2017. Data from: The morphology, phylogenetic position and biogeography of the upper Permian dicynodont Compsodon helmoedi van Hoepen
(Therapsida, Anomodontia). Dryad Digital Repository.
https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.fq3dq
-and K U R K I N , A. A. 2003a. Phylogenetic analysis of Russian Permian dicynodonts (Therapsida: Anomodontia): implications for Permian biostratigraphy and Pangaean
biogeography. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 139,
157–212.

541

-2003b. Has the utility of Dicynodon for Upper Per-

mian terrestrial biostratigraphy been overstated? Geology, 31,
363–366.
- and R U B I D G E , B. S. 2009. The Permian dicynodont
Colobodectes cluveri (Therapsida, Anomodontia), with notes
on its ontogeny and stratigraphic range in the Karoo Basin,
South Africa. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 29, 1162–
1173.
-2010. A new pylaecephalid dicynodont (Therapsida,
Anomodontia) from the Tapinocephalus Assemblage Zone,
Karoo Basin, Middle Permian of South Africa. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 30, 1396–1409.
-2013. Skeletal morphology, phylogenetic relationships
and stratigraphic range of Eosimops newtoni Broom, 1921, a
pylaecephalid dicynodont (Therapsida, Anomodontia) from
the Middle Permian of South Africa. Journal of Systematic
Palaeontology, 11, 191–231.
-and S C H M I T Z , L. 2014. Nocturnality in synapsids predates the origin of mammals by over 100 million years. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 281, 20141642.
-and W A L S H , M. L. 2008. Patterns in the evolution of nares
size and secondary palate length in anomodont therapsids
(Synapsida): implications for hypoxia as a cause of end-Permian
tetrapod extinctions. Journal of Paleontology, 82, 528–542.
€ B I S C H , J. and S M I T H , R. M. H. 2005. On the
-F R O
stratigraphic range of the dicynodont taxon Emydops (Therapsida: Anomodontia) in the Karoo Basin, South Africa.
Palaeontologia Africana, 41, 23–33.
-S I D O R , C. A., N E S B I T T , S. J., S M I T H , R. M. H. and
T S U J I , L. A. 2009. Taxonomic revision and new observation
on the postcranial skeleton, biogeography, and biostratigraphy
of the dicynodont genus Dicynodontoides, the senior subjective
synonym of Kingoria (Therapsida, Anomodontia). Journal of
Vertebrate Paleontology, 29, 1174–1187.
- S T E Y E R , J.-S., S I D O R , C. A., S M I T H , R. M. H.,
W H A T L E Y , R. L. and T O L A N , S. 2014a. Permian and
Triassic dicynodont (Therapsida: Anomodontia) faunas of the
Luangwa Basin, Zambia: taxonomic update and implications
for dicynodont biogeography and biostratigraphy. 93–138. In
K A M M E R E R , C. F., A N G I E L C Z Y K , K. D. and
€ I S C H , J. (eds). Early evolutionary history of the SynapF R OB
sida. Springer, 337 pp.
- H U E R T A S , S., S M I T H , R. M. H., T A B O R , N. J.,
S I D O R , C. A., S T E Y E R , J.-S., T S U J I , L. A. and G O S T L I N G , N. J. 2014b. New dicynodonts (Therapsida,
Anomodontia) and updated tetrapod stratigraphy of the Permian Ruhuhu Formation (Songea Group, Ruhuhu Basin) of
southern Tanzania. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 34,
1408–1426.
-R U B I D G E , B. S., D A Y , M. O. and L I N , F. 2016. A reevaluation of Brachyprosopus broomi and Chelydontops altidentalis, dicynodonts (Therapsida, Anomodontia) from the
Middle Permian Tapinocephalus Assemblage Zone of the
Karoo Basin, South Africa. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology,
36, e1078342.
-H A N C O X , P. J. and N A B A V I Z A D E H , A. in press. A
re-description of the Triassic kannemeyeriiform dicynodont
Sangusaurus (Therapsida, Anomodontia), with an analysis of

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ANGIELCZYK & KAMMERER: REDESCRIPTION OF COMPSODON

PAPERS IN PALAEONTOLOGY, VOLUME 3

its feeding system. In S I D O R , C. A. and N E S B I T T , S. J.
(eds). Vertebrate and climatic evolution in the Triassic rift
basins of Tanzania and Zambia. Society of Vertebrate Paleontology Memoir, 17, Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 37 (6,
suppl.).
€ B I S C H , J. 2014.
A S C H E N B A C H , T., J A N S E N , M. and F R O
The postcranial anatomy of the small Early Triassic dicynodont
Myosaurus gracilis (Therapsida, Anomodontia). Society of Vertebrate Paleontology, Program & Abstracts, 2014, 82.
B A R B O L I N I , N., B A M F O R D , M. K. and T O L A N , S.
2016. Permo-Triassic palynology and palaeobontany of Zambia: a review. Palaeontologia Africana, 50, 18–30.
B A R R Y , T. H. 1967. The cranial morphology of the PermoTriassic anomodont Pristerodon buffaloensis with special reference to the neural endocranium and visceral arch skeleton.
Annals of the South African Museum, 50, 131–161.
- 1968. Sound conduction in the fossil anomodont Lystrosaurus. Annals of the South African Museum, 50, 275–281.
B O O N S T R A , L. D. 1938. A report on some Karroo reptiles
from the Luangwa Valley, Northern Rhodesia. Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society of London, 94, 371–384.
B O O S , A. D. S., S C H U L T Z , C. L., V E G A , C. S. and
A U M O N D , J. J. 2013. On the presence of the Late Permian
dicynodont Endothiodon in Brazil. Palaeontology, 56, 837–848.
-K A M M E R E R , C. F., S C H U L T Z , C. L., S O A R E S , M.
B. and I L H A , A. L. R. 2016. A new dicynodont (Therapsida;
Anomodontia) from the Permian of southern Brazil and its
implications for bidentalian origins. PLoS One, 11 (5),
e0155000.
 R U B I D G E , B. S. and
B O R D Y , E. M., S Z T A N , O. O.,
B U M B Y , A. 2011. Early Triassic vertebrate burrows from the
Katberg Formation of the south-western Karoo Basin, South
Africa. Lethaia, 44, 33–45.
B O T H A , J. and A N G I E L C Z Y K , K. D. 2007. An integrative
approach to distinguishing the Late Permian dicynodont species Oudenodon bainii and Tropidostoma microtrema (Therapsida: Anomodontia). Palaeontology, 50, 1175–1209.
B R E M E R , K. 1988. The limits of amino acid sequence data in
angiosperm phylogenetic reconstruction. Evolution, 42, 795–
803.
-1994. Branch support and tree stability. Cladistics, 10, 295–
304.
B R I N K , A. W. and K E Y S E R , A. W. 1983. Tropidostoma
microtrema (Seeley, 1889). Illustrated bibliographic catalogue
of the Synapsida. Geological Survey of South Africa Handbook,
10, J212A231B1.
B R O O M , R. 1905. On the structure and affinities of the
endothiodont reptiles. Transactions of the South African Philosophical Society, 15, 259–282.
C A M P , C. L. 1956. Triassic dicynodont reptiles. II. Triassic
dicynodonts compared. Memoirs of the University of California,
13, 305–341.
 J O , R., C O S T A J U
 NIOR,
C A S T A N H I N H A , R., A R A U
L., A N G I E L C Z Y K , K. D., M A R T I N S , G. G., M A R T I N S , R. M. S., C H A O U I Y A , C., B E C K M A N N , F. and
W I L D E , F. 2013. Bringing dicynodonts back to life: paleobiology and anatomy of a new emydopoid genus from the
Upper Permian of Mozambique. PLoS One, 8 (12), e80974.

C I S N E R O S , J. C., A B D A L A , F., R U B D I G E , B. S.,
D E N T Z I E N - D I A S , P. C. and D E O L I V E I R A B U E N O ,
A. 2011. Dental occlusion in a 260-million-year-old therapsid
with saber canines from the Permian of Brazil. Science, 331,
1603–1605.
-- J A S H A S H V I L I , T., D E O L I V E I R A B U E N O ,
A. and D E N T Z I E N - D I A S , P. 2015. Tiarajudens eccentricus
and Anomocephalus africanus, two bizarre anomodonts
(Synapsida, Therapsida) with dental occlusion from the Permian of Gondwana. Royal Society Open Science, 2 (7), 150090.
C L U V E R , M. A. 1971. The cranial morphology of the dicynodont genus Lystrosaurus. Annals of the South African
Museum, 56, 155–274.
- 1974a. The skull and mandible of a new cistecephalid
dicynodont. Annals of the South African Museum, 66, 137–155.
- 1974b. The cranial morphology of the Lower Triassic
dicynodont Myosaurus gracilis. Annals of the South African
Museum, 66, 35–54.
-1978. The skeleton of the mammal-like reptile Cistecephalus
with evidence for a fossorial mode of life. Annals of the South
African Museum, 76, 213–246.
-and H O T T O N , N. III 1981. The genera Dicynodon and
Diictodon and their bearing on the classification of the Dicynodontia (Reptilia, Therapsida). Annals of the South African
Museum, 83, 99–146.
-and K I N G , G. M. 1983. A reassessment of the relationships of Permian Dicynodontia (Reptilia, Therapsida) and a
new classification of dicynodonts. Annals of the South African
Museum, 91, 195–273.
C O X , C. B. 1959. On the anatomy of a new dicynodont genus
with evidence of the position of the tympanum. Proceedings of
the Zoological Society of London, 132, 321–367.
-1972. A new digging dicynodont from the Upper Permian
of Zambia. 173–189. In J O Y S E Y , K. A. and K E M P , T. S.
(eds). Studies in vertebrate evolution. Oliver & Boyd, Edinburgh. 284 pp.
- and A N G I E L C Z Y K , K. D. 2015. A new endothiodont
dicynodont (Therapsida, Anomodontia) from the Permian
Ruhuhu Formation (Songea Group) of Tanzania and its feeding system. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 35, e935388.
C R O M P T O N , A. W. and H O T T O N , N. III 1967. Functional
morphology of the masticatory apparatus of two dicynodonts
(Reptilia, Therapsida). Postilla, 109, 1–51.
D A M I A N I , R., V A S C O N C E L O S , C., R E N A U T , A.,
H A N C O X , J. and Y A T E S , A. 2007. Dolichuranus primaevus
(Therapsida: Anomodontia) from the Middle Triassic of
Namibia and its phylogenetic relationships. Palaeontology, 50,
1531–1546.
D R Y S D A L L , A. R. and K I T C H I N G , J. W. 1963. A re-examination of the Karroo succession and fossil localities of part of
the upper Luangwa Valley. Geological Survey of Northern
Rhodesia Memoir, 1, 1–62.
E W E R , R. F. 1961. The anatomy of the anomodont Daptocephalus leoniceps (Owen). Proceedings of the Zoological Society
of London, 136, 375–402.
€ L L E R S J , M. O.,
€ LIPF A R R I S , J. S., A L B E R T , V. A., K A
S C O M B , D. and K L U G E , A. G. 1996. Parsimony jackknifing outperforms neighbor-joining. Cladistics, 12, 99–124.

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

542

F O U R I E , H. 1993. A detailed description of the internal structure of the skull of Emydops (Therapsida: Dicynodontia).
Palaeontologia Africana, 30, 103–111.
€ B I S C H , J. 2007. The cranial anatomy of Kombuisia frerenFRO
sis Hotton (Synapsida, Dicynodontia) and a new phylogeny of
anomodont therapsids. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 150, 117–144.
- 2009. Composition and similarity of global anomodontbearing tetrapod faunas. Earth-Science Reviews, 95, 119–157.
- and R E I S Z , R. R. 2008. A new species of Emydops
(Synapsida, Anomodontia) and a discussion of dental variability and pathology in dicynodonts. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 28, 770–787.
-2011. The postcranial anatomy of Suminia getmanovi
(Synapsida: Anomodontia), the earliest known arboreal tetrapod. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 162, 661–698.
- A N G I E L C Z Y K , K. D. and S I D O R , C. A. 2010. The
Triassic dicynodont Kombuisia (Synapsida, Anomodontia)
from Antarctica, a refuge from the terrestrial Permian-Triassic
mass extinction. Naturwissenschaften, 97, 187–196.
€ L L E R S J , M. O.,
€
G O L O B O F F , P. A., F A R R I S , J. S., K A
O X E L M A N , B., R A MI R E Z , M. J. and S Z U M I K , C. A.
2003. Improvements to resampling measures of group support. Cladistics, 19, 324–332.
-M A T T O N I , C. I. and Q U I N T E R O S , A. S. 2006. Continuous characters analyzed as such. Cladistics, 22, 589–601.
- F A R R I S , J. S. and N I X O N , K. C. 2008. TNT, a free
program for phylogenetic analysis. Cladistics, 24, 774–786.
G R O E N E W A L D , G. H. 1991. Burrow casts from the Lystrosaurus-Procolophon Assemblage-zone, Karoo Sequence,
South Africa. Koedoe, 34, 13–22.
H A U G H T O N , S. H. and B R I N K , A. S. 1954. A bibliographic
list of the Reptilia form the Karroo beds of Africa. Palaeontologia Africana, 2, 1–187.
H O E P E N , E. C. N. VAN 1934. Oor die indeling van die
Dicynodontoidae na aanleiding van nuwe vorme. Paleontologiese Navorsing van die Nasionale Museum, 2, 67–101.
H O T T O N , N. III 1974. A new dicynodont from the Cynognathus zone deposits of South Africa. Annals of the South African Museum, 64, 157–166.
K A M M E R E R , C. F. and A N G I E L C Z Y K , K. D. 2009. A proposed higher taxonomy of anomodont therapsids. Zootaxa,
2018, 1–24.
-and S M I T H , R. M. H. 2017. An early geikiid dicynodont
from the Tropidostoma Assemblage Zone (late Permian) of
South Africa. PeerJ, 5, e2913.
€ B I S C H , J. 2011. A
- A N G I E L C Z Y K , K. D. and F R O
comprehensive taxonomic revision of Dicynodon (Therapsida,
Anomodontia) and its implications for dicynodont phylogeny,
biogeography, and biostratigraphy. Society of Vertebrate Paleontology Memoir, 11, 1–158.
€ B I S C H , J. and A N G I E L C Z Y K , K. D. 2013. On
-F R O
the validity and phylogenetic position of Eubrachiosaurus
browni, a kannemeyeriiform dicynodont (Anomodontia) from
Triassic North America. PLoS One, 8 (5), e64203.
€ B I S C H , J. 2015a.
- A N G I E L C Z Y K , K. D. and F R O
Redescription of Digalodon rubidgei, an emydopoid

543

dicynodont (Therapsida, Anomodontia) from the Late Permian of South Africa. Fossil Record, 18, 43–55.
-2015b. Redescription of the geikiid Pelanomodon
(Therapsida Dicynodontia), with a reconsideration of ‘Propelanomodon’. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 36, e1030408.
- B A N D Y O P A D H Y A Y , S. and R A Y , S. 2016. A new
taxon of cistecephalid dicynodont from the Upper Permian
Kundaram Formation of India. Papers in Palaeontology, 2,
589–594.
K E M P , T. S. 1969. The atlas-axis complex of the mammal-like
reptiles. Journal of Zoology, 159, 223–248.
K E Y S E R , A. W. 1973. A preliminary study of the type area of
the Cistecephalus Zone of the Beaufort Series, and a revision
of the anomodont family Cistecephalidae. Geological Survey of
South Africa Memoir, 62, 1–71.
- 1975. A reevaluation of the cranial morphology and systematics of some tuskless Anomodontia. Geological Survey of
South Africa Memoir, 67, 1–110.
- and C R U I C K S H A N K , A. R. I. 1979. The origins and
classification of Triassic dicynodonts. Transactions of the Geological Society of South Africa, 82, 81–108.
K I N G , G. M. 1981a. The functional anatomy of a Permian
dicynodont. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society Series B, 291, 243–322.
-1981b. The postcranial skeleton of Robertia broomiana, an
early dicynodont (Reptilia, Therapsida) from the South African Karroo. Annals of the South African Museum, 84, 203–231.
- 1985. The postcranial skeleton of Kingoria nowacki (von
Huene) (Therapsida: Dicynodontia). Zoological Journal of the
Linnean Society, 84, 263–289.
-1988. Anomodontia. 1–174. In W E L L N H O F E R , P. (ed.)
Handbuch der Pal€aoherpetologie, 17C. Gustav Fischer Verlag,
Stuttgart, 174 pp.
-1990. The dicynodonts: a study in palaeobiology. Chapman
& Hall, 233 pp.
- O E L O F S E N , B. W. and R U B I D G E , B. S. 1989. The
evolution of the dicynodont feeding system. Zoological Journal
of the Linnean Society, 96, 185–211.
K I T C H I N G , J. W. 1977. The distribution of the Karroo vertebrate fauna. Bernard Price Institute for Palaeontological
Research Memoir, 1, 1–131.
K O P U C H I A N , C. and R A M I R E Z , M. J. 2010. Behaviour of
resampling methods under different weighting schemes, measures and variable sampling strengths. Cladistics, 26, 86–97.
K U R K I N , A. A. 1999. A new dicynodont from the Malaya Severnaya Dvina River excavations. Paleontological Journal, 33,
297–301.
- 2000. New dicynodonts from the Upper Permian of the
Vyatka Basin. Paleontological Journal, 34, 53–59.
- 2006. A new dicynodont (Anomodontia, Eotherapsida)
from the Upper Permian of Tatarstan. Paleontological Journal,
40, 81–84.
-2010. Late Permian dicynodonts of Eastern Europe. Paleontological Journal, 44, 672–681.
L A A ß , M. 2015. Bone-conduction hearing and seismic sensitivity of the late Permian anomodont Kawingasaurus fossilis.
Journal of Morphology, 276, 121–143.

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ANGIELCZYK & KAMMERER: REDESCRIPTION OF COMPSODON

PAPERS IN PALAEONTOLOGY, VOLUME 3

-2016. The origins of the cochlea and impedance matching

hearing in synapsids. Acta Palaeontologia Polonica, 61, 267–
280.
L I U , J., R U B I D G E , B. S. and L I , J. 2010. A new specimen of
Biseridens qilianicus indicates its phylogenetic position as the
most basal anomodont. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 277,
285–292.
M A I S C H , M. W. 2003. Lower jaw morphology and jaw adductor musculature of the giant Permian dicynodont Rhachiocephalus Seeley, 1898 (Therapsida) from the Late Permian of
Tanzania. Geologica et Palaeontologica, 37, 89–106.
M O D E S T O , S. P. and B O T H A - B R I N K , J. 2010. A burrow
cast with Lystrosaurus skeletal remains from the Lower Triassic
of South Africa. Palaios, 25, 274–281.
-R U B I D G E , B. S. and W E L M A N , J. 2002. A new dicynodont therapsid from the lowermost Beaufort Group, Upper
Permian of South Africa. Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences,
39, 1755–1765.
M U E L L E R , L. D. and A Y A L A , F. J. 1982. Estimation and
interpretation of genetic distance in empirical studies. Genetical Research, 40, 127–137.
N A S T E R L A C K , T., C A N O V I L L E , A. and C H I N S A M Y ,
A. 2012. New insights into the biology of the Permian genus
Cistecephalus (Therapsida, Dicynodontia). Journal of Vertebrate
Paleontology, 32, 1396–1410.
€ B I S C H , J. 2014.
N E H L S , M., K A M M E R E R , C. and F R O
CT reconstruction and systematic position of the enigmatic
dicynodont Prodicynodon beaufortensis. Society of Vertebrate
Paleontology, Program & Abstracts, 2014, 194.
O L R O Y D , S. L., S I D O R , C. A. and A N G I E L C Z Y K , K. D.
in press. New materials of the enigmatic dicynodont Abajudon
kaayai (Therapsida, Anomodontia) from the lower Madumabisa Mudstone Formation, middle Permian of Zambia. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology.
O L S O N , E. C. 1944. Origin of mammals based upon cranial
morphology of the therapsid suborders. Geological Society of
America Special Papers, 55, 1–136.
O W E N , R. 1860. On the orders of fossil and Recent Reptilia, and
their distribution in time. Report of the 29th Meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1859), 153–166.
-1876. Descriptive and illustrative catalogue of the fossil reptilia of South Africa in the collection of the British Museum.
Taylor & Francis, London, xii + 88 pp, 70 pls.
R A Y , S. and C H I N S A M Y , A. 2003. Functional aspects of
the postcranial anatomy of the Permian dicynodont Diictodon and their ecological implications. Palaeontology, 46,
151–183.
R E I S Z , R. R. and M O D E S T O , S. P. 2007. Heleosaurus
scholtzi from the Permian of South Africa: a varanopid synapsid, not a diapsid reptile. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology,
27, 734–739.
-B H A S I N , M. and L E B L A N C , A. R. H. 2015. Was the
oldest sexually dimorphic armament of the synapsid Diictodon
feliceps a tusk or a tooth? Comparative dental histology provides the answer. Abstracts, Program, Schedule of Events, 3rd
Annual Meeting, 2015, Canadian Society of Vertebrate Paleontology, 36.

R E T A L L A C K , G. J., S M I T H , R. M. H. and W A R D , P. D.
2003. Vertebrate extinction across the Permian–Triassic
boundary in Karoo Basin, South Africa. Geological Society of
America Bulletin, 115, 1133–1152.
R U B I D G E , B. S. 1990. Redescription of the cranial morphology of Eodicynodon oosthuizeni (Therapsida: Dicynodontia).
Navorsinge van die Nasionale Museum Bloemfontein, 7, 1–25.
-and H O P S O N , J. A. 1996. A primitive anomodont therapsid from the base of the Beaufort Group (Upper Permian)
of South Africa. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 117,
115–139.
- D A Y , M. O., B A R B O L I N I , N., H A N C O X , P. J.,
C H O I N I E R E , J. N., B A M F O R D , M. K., V I G L I E T T I , P.
A., M c P H E E , B. W. and J I R A H , S. 2016. Advances in nonmarine Karoo biostratigraphy: significance for understanding
basin development. 141–149. In L I N O L , B. and D E W I T ,
M. J. (eds). Origin and evolution of the Cape Mountains and
Karoo Basin. Springer, 193 pp.
€ B I S C H , J. and
R U T A , M., A N G I E L C Z Y K , K. D., F R O
B E N T O N , M. J. 2013. Decoupling of morphological disparity and taxic diveristy during the adaptive radiation of
anomodont therapsids. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 280,
20131071.
S E E L E Y , H. G. 1892. Researches on the structure, organization, and classification of the fossil Reptilia. VII. Further
observations on Pareiasaurus. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London B, 183, 311–370.
-1894. Researches on the structure, organisation, and classification of the fossil Reptilia.—Part IX., Section 1. On the
Therosuchia. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London, B, 185, 987–1018.
-1898. On Oudenodon (Aulacocephalus) pithecops from the
Dicynodon beds of East London, Cape Colony. Geological
Magazine, 5, 107–110.
S I D O R , C. A., A N G I E L C Z Y K , K. D., W E I D E , D. M.,
S M I T H , R. M. H., N E S B I T T , S. J. and T S U J I , L. A.
2010. Tetrapod fauna of the lowermost Usili Formation (Songea Group, Ruhuhu Basin) of southern Tanzania, with a new
burnetiid record. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 30, 696–
703.
S I M M O N S , M. P. and F R E U D E N S T E I N , J. V. 2011. Spurious 99% bootstrap and jackknife support for unsupported
clades. Molecular Phylogenetics & Evolution, 61, 177–191.
S M I T H , R. M. H. 1987. Helical burrow casts of therapsid
origin from the Beaufort Group (Permian) of South Africa.
Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, 60, 155–
169.
-and K E Y S E R , A. W. 1995. Biostratigraphy of the Cistecephalus Assemblage Zone. 23–28. In R U B I D G E , B. S. (ed.)
Biostratigraphy of the Beaufort Group (Karoo Supergroup).
South African Committee for Stratigraphy Biostratigraphic
Series, 1, 46 pp.
-R U B I D G E , B. and V A N D E R W A L T , M. 2012. Therapsid biodiversity patterns and paleoenvironments of the Karoo
Basin, South Africa. 30–62. In C H I N S A M Y - T U R A N , A.
(ed.) Forerunners of mammals: radiation, histology, biology.
Indiana University Press, 330 pp.

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

544

S T R O N G , E. E. and L I P S C O M B , D. 2000. Character coding
and inapplicable data. Cladistics, 15, 363–371.
S U L L I V A N , C. and R E I S Z , R. R. 2005. Cranial anatomy and
taxonomy of the late Permian dicynodont Diictodon. Annals of
Carnegie Museum, 74, 45–75.
T O E R I E N , M. J. 1953. The evolution of the palate in South
African Anomodontia and its classificatory significance.
Palaeontologia Africana, 1, 49–117.
-1954. Note on the systematic position of Compsodon, Van H.
Navorsinge van die Nasionale Museum Bloemfontein, 1, 131–132.
V I G L I E T T I , P. A., S M I T H , R. M. H., A N G I E L C Z Y K , K.
€ B I S C H , J. and R U B I D G E ,
D., K A M M E R E R , C. F., F R O
B. S. 2016. The Daptocephalus Assemblage Zone (Lopingian),
South Africa: a proposed biostratigraphy based on a new

545

compilation of stratigraphic ranges. Journal of African Earth
Sciences, 113, 153–164.
W A T S O N , D. M. S. 1914. The zones of the Beaufort Beds of
the Karroo System in South Africa. Geological Magazine, New
Series, Decade 6, 1, 203–208.
-1948. Dicynodon and its allies. Proceedings of the Zoological
Society of London, 118, 823–877.
W A L T , M. VAN DER, D A Y , M., R U B I D G E , B.,
C O O P E R , A. K. and N E T T E R B E R G , I. 2010. GIS-based
biozone map of the Beaufort Group (Karoo Supergroup),
South Africa. Palaeontologia Africana, 45, 1–5.
Z H U , Y. 1989. The discovery of dicynodonts in Daqingshan
Mountain, Nei Mongol (Inner Mongolia). Vertebrata PalAsiatica, 27, 9–27.

20562802, 2017, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/spp2.1087 by Georgia Institute Of Technology, Wiley Online Library on [05/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ANGIELCZYK & KAMMERER: REDESCRIPTION OF COMPSODON

