Trans. geol. Soc. S. Afr.. 82 (1979), 81-108

THE ORIGINS AND CLASSIFICATION OF TRIASSIC DICYNODONTS
by
A. W. KEYSER and A. R. I. CRUICKSHANK

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

ABSTRACT
The problem of the classification of the Triassic Dicynodontia, a notoriously difficult group of fossil
Theraspida, is reviewed in depth and Cox's classification is revised accordingly. From this a suite of
characters emerges which serves to define the unified character of the larger Triassic genera, the Kannemeyeridae Huene, typified by Kannemeyeria Seeley. These characters are: large size, with skulls normally exceeding 25 cm in overall length and often being more than 50 cm; possession of a long snout and
palatal region, with concomitant shortening of the temporal openings; short fenestra medio-palatinalis,
which migrates out with the limits of the choanal depression in some late forms, and mayor may not
have raised flap-like margins; dorsally deepened intertemporal bar; fused anterior elements in the braincase; a reflected lamina of the angular which is close to or contacts the lateral condyle of the articular;
(associated with the latter case, the quadrate foramen is seen to disappear); the forward growth of a
pterygoid process of the quadrate; the epipterygoid with a dorsal process on the anterior footplate; an
intertemporal region always narrower than the interorbital; highly reduced postfrontals; absence or
extreme reduction of the ectopterygoid; a short "x"- or "v"-shaped interclavicle; a separately ossified
olecranon ulnae.
Using these characters, Triassic dicynodonts can be seen to be derived from a form similar to Rhachiocephalus dubius Boonstra, which is shown to be close to the genera Daptocephalus and Dinanomodon of
Daptocephalus zone age (uppermost Permian). Because of this relationship, a new genus is created for
Rhachiocephalus dubius, viz. Odontocyc!ops, which is of Cistecephalus zone age (Upper Permian). Daptocephalus is believed to be ancestral to the newly defined, broad-snouted, subfamily Dinodontosaurinae and
Dinanomodon is believed to be ancestral to the narrow-snouted, subfamily Kannemeyerinae Lehman
emend. The very large Upper Triassic genera are classified in the su bfamily, Stahleckerinae non sensu
Lehman. The very late Triassic subfamily, Jachelerinae Keyser, is retained. Lystrosaurus. Myosaurus and
Kombiusia are included in the final revised classification of Triassic dicynodonts which is seen to be
made up of 26 genera and 47 species.
CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
II. THE ORIGIN OF TRIASSIC DICYNODONTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A. General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B. Odontocyc!ops dubius (Boonstra) gen. nov. formerly Rhachiocephalus dubius Boonstra, 1938
C. Genus Daptocephalus Van Hoepen, 1934 .
D. Genus Dinanomodon Broom, 1938
E. Genus Dinodontosaurus Romer, 1943
F. Genus Kannemeyeria Seeley .
G. The Origin of Kannemeyeria . . . .
H. The Origin of Dinodontosaurus . . .
III. PREVIOUS CLASSIFICATIONS
A. General Review
.....................
B. The Status of the Families Kannemeyeridae and Stahleckeridae Cox .
IV. A REVISED CLASSIFICATION OF TRIASSIC DICYNODONTS
A. The Family Kannemeyeridae Huene, 1948 . . . . . .
I. Subfamily I Kannemeyerinae Lehman, 1961 Emend
2. Subfamily II Dinodontosaurinae Subfam. Nov. . . .
3. Subfamily III Stahleckerinae non sensu Lehman, 1961
4. Subfamily lachelerinae Keyser, 1974
B. Triassic Dicynodontia Incertae Sedis
C. Other Dicynodontia of Triassic Age
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
REFERENCES . . . . . . . . .

I. INTRODUCTION
The last decade or so has seen a virtual "explosion" in
the number of genera and species of Triassic Dicynodontia. New forms have come from all the Gondwana fragments, except Australia, as well as Russia and China.
In many ways there is great morphological similarity between the various species and a broad subdivision into
"blunt-nosed" and "narrow-nosed" forms was demonstrated by Cox (1965). Some of the more specialised Late
Triassic forms do not appear to fit into such a broad classification, however, and these, e.g. Ischigualastia. Stahleckeria and Placerias are in retrospect difficult to place in
either of these two groups. In this paper they are regarded
as forming a distinct group separate from the others.
Most of the newly discovered species more or' less coincide with the Shansiodontidae as understood by Cox
(1965), e.g. Shansiodon Yeh, Tetragonias Cruickshank,

Page
81
82
82
82
85
86
86
88
90
91
91
91
93
97
98
98
99
102
106
106
106
107
108

Dolichuranus Keyser and Vinceria Bonaparte. Dinodontosaurus von Huene also appears to fall into this group which
certainly no longer deserves to be called "primitive" as
was done by Cox (1965) in his classic paper on the Triassic
Dicynodontia. This "shansiodont" group then actually
constitutes a distinct "natural" group of broad-snouted
Triassic Dicynodontia, separate from the Stahleckeridae
as defined by Cox (op. cit.). In the authors' opinion there
are far too many generic names in the "shansiodonts" and
it is possible that only two genera with many species will
be ultimately used as research progresses. These are Shansiodon and Dinodontosaurus. It is most unfortunate that so
little is known about the detailed morphology of Shansiodon. Thus we do not propose to base any higher taxon on
this latter genus.
The narrow-snouted forms constitute a smaller group of
Triassic Dicynodontia, the genus Kannemeyeria occupying

82

TRANSACTIONS OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF SOUTH AFRICA

a possible central position in this group. The familial name
Kannemeyeridae has been proposed for this group by Cox
(1965) in a different sense to that of Von Huene (1948). In
the authors' opinion, far too many generic names also exist
in this group.
The greater number of Triassic Dicynodontia seem now
to be better placed in either one of these two groups. The
genus lacheleria Bonaparte is regarded as being the type
of a quite distinct fourth grouping of very specialised late
Triassic forms.

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

II. THE ORIGIN OF TRIASSIC DICYNODONTS
A. General
The Triassic Dicynodontia have a number of features in
common which are not found in most of the Permian genera. They are characterised by a shortening of the postorbital part of the skull (as has been noted by many
authors, e.g. Crompton and Hotton, 1967; Cox, 1965;
Cruickshank, 1967; Keyser, 1974), which probably resulted from a more dorsal origin of the jaw musculature as
an adaptation to a diet dominated by the plant genus Dicroidium and various cycads (Keyser, 1974).
A shortening of the back half of the skull with a concomitant increase in the length of the snout is not found in
any of the Permian genera except Daptocephalus and Dinanomodon, which occur in the uppermost Permian Daptocephalus Zone of the Beaufort Group of South Africa.
Concomitant with the shortening of the rear of the skull,
several other characters appear in Triassic Dicynodontia
which are not found in most of their Permian counterparts. These are, among others, the marked shortening of
the fenestra medio-palatinalis (interpterygoid vacuity or
space) and the development of a dorsal process on the
pterygoid ramus of the epipterygoid.
It was, therefore, decided that Permian dicynodonts
which display these advanced features should be re-examined as possible ancestors of the Triassic forms; as most of
the Lower Triassic genera are tusked, only tusked Permian
genera need to be considered.
Several large dicynodont skulls in the collection of the
Bernard Price Institute for Palaeontological Research display reduced fenestrae medio-palatinales and are tusked.
These specimens are from the Madumabisa Mudstone
Formation in the Luangwa Valley, Zambia. They were all
collected at Locality 4 (Kitching, 1963) at which the genus
Cistecephalus also occurs. In these, several features can be
demonstrated which could indicate that the species they
represented is possibly ancestral to the genus Daptocephalus.
All these specimens can be referred to Rhachiocephalus dub ius
Boonstra. Among the advanced features to be seen in this
dicynodont are a shortened fenestra medio-palatinalis and an
epipterygoid with an incipient dorsal process on the pterygoid
ramus.
However, as this species shows few of the characters
seen in combination in the genus Rhachiocephalus (Keyser,
1969, 1974) it is necessary to reassess its taxonomic position and to redescribe its cranial anatomy in more detail
than did Boonstra in 1938.
B. Odontocyclops dubius (Boonstra) gen. nov. formerly
Rhachiocephalus dubius Boonstra, 1938

Diagnosis
Large Dicynodontia (skull length often more than
60 cm) with canine tusks in most specimens. Nostril placed
high up in the snout far from alveolar border. Intertemporal region about the same length as the distance from
the postorbital arches to the tip of the snout. The nasal
bosses well-developed and elongate: completely confluent
with the pre-frontal bosses and give the dorsal surface of
the snout a concave appearance. Intertemporal region
broad with a wide portion of the parietals visible between
the postorbitals which extend back to meet the squam-

osals. Palatal structure similar to that of Daptocephalus
with extensive contact between the palatines and the premaxilla. Fenestra medio-palatinalis placed far back in the
choanal depression and is about one third th~ length .of the
choanal depression. The footplate of the eplpterygOid has
a long anterior extension.
H olotype: Specimen 11313, South African Museum, Cape
Town.
Type Locality: "Luangwa Valley", Zambia. Locality 4
(Drysdall and Kitching, 1963) is probably the type locality.
.
Horizon: Upper Madumabisa Mudstone (Upper Permian:
Cistecephalus Zone)
Referred Material: 4 Skulls in the collection of the Bernard
Price Institute for Palaeontological Research. Collector, J. W. Kitching.
This species was first described by the late Dr L. D.
Boonstra in 1938. The holotype consists of a large tusked
skull that was badly damaged during excavation and preparation. The greater part of the specimen is embedded in a
block of plaster of Paris. The only features that can be
identified and used in the identification of the species are
the presence of tusks, the elongate nasal bosses and the
broad intertemporal region. Since the original description,
no other specimens have been referred to this species in
the literature. Boonstra referred his original material to
the genus Rachiocephalus.
Eighteen species of large tuskless dicynodonts are
known from the Beaufort Group of South Africa. These
were reviewed by Keyser (1975) who concluded that it was
impossible to distinguish the various species on the
material that is available at present and that only the name
Rhachiocephalus magnus (Owen) should be used.
It has since then come to light that the type of Platycyclops crassus Broom has a pterygoid process of the
quadrate which serves to remove it from the genus Rhachiocephalus (Keyser, 1974).
Rhachiocephalus dubius Boonstra (1938) displays a number of features that serve to distinguish it from the other
species of the genus Rhachiocephalus. The species dubius
has large tusks, labial fossae and peculiar nasal bosses. It
lacks the prominent ridges on the caniniform processes as
well as the median longitudinal ridge that is so characteristic of Rhachiocephalus.
Unfortunately, most of the fossil vertebrates from the
Madumabisa Mudstone are preserved in an extremely refractory ferruginous mudstone that mainly consists of haematite. This matrix defies ordinary mechanical and chemical methods of preparation. This accounts for the fact that
so little is known about the rich and varied theraspid fauna
from the Luangwa Valley.

Measurements in mm
Specimen
No.

Total
length

Basal
length

Interorbital
width

Intertemporal
width

BPI 3585
BPI 3419
BPI 3586
BPI 3589

561

392
382
421
27

III
119
III
83

100
80
83
56

589
424

The specimens show a wide variation in proportions,
size of tusks and many other features. These differences
must be considered to be due to individual variation and
post-mortem deformation. The four specimens are regarded as a sample of a fossil population because they
were ~ound close to one another at the same stratigraphic
level In the Upper Madumabisa Mudstone and have a
number of features in common that are of rare occurrence

83

ORIGINS AND CLASSIFICATION OF TRIASSIC DICYNODONTS

in other dicynodont species. These are:
(a) The possession of elongate nasal bosses.
(b) The concave dorsal surface of the snout.
(c) The occurrence of a small boss on the lateral surface
of the lacrimal.
(d) Wide intertemporal region that widens posteriorly.
(e) Short fenestrae medio-palatinales with raised margins.
The authors, therefore, feel justified in considering the
four specimens as belonging to the same species. The
material was prepared by mechanical methods.

The Skull
Dorsal and Lateral views (Figs. 1 and 2)

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

The general shape of the skull is very similar to that of

Oudellodon and Rhachiocephalus. Sutures are difficult. to
trace because of the massive nature of the bones; the anterior.. and dorsal surfaces of the premaxilla are concave
medially. There is no medial longitudinal ridge on the dorsal surface of the premaxilla as is found in many other anomodonts. The concave dorsal surface of the premaxilla is
continued posteriorly on to the dorsal surface of the nasalso Posterior to the nares externi the nasals form large
elongate nasal bosses which are continued posteriorly on
to the prefrontals. The entire dorsal surface of the snout
therefore appears to be concave. It can be expected that
this feature will be exaggerated by post-mortem deformation because of the mechanical strength of the elongate
nasal bosses, which will be more resistant to compression
than the thinner bones along the midline of the snout.

.'\

~~1
(

\

/'"

~
>

"m ...

..------. . .\.J/ ._ ----

. ., . , 7"---(

~
;/

.

~., '

~f

'

s
Iq

(

\

sq

\~"- /

)

..
I

,/

Odon(QCYclop.~ dubius (Boonstra) gen.

approximately)

p.

/
Figures 1-4
nov. B.P.I.F. No. 3589. Viewed in dorsal. lateral, palatal and occipital aspects respectively. (Scale 0.25

84

TRANSACTIONS OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF SOUTH AFRICA

The lacrimals form a small part of the side of the snout
but do not reach the posterior margins of the nares externi, and the septomaxillae are firmly sutured to the
maxillae.
The occurrence of canine tusks is highly variable in the
four specimens that were studied. Specimen BPI 3585,
which is the second largest specimen in the series, has no
erupted tusks and this has small caniniform processes as
are found in Rhachiocephalus. One of the caniniform processes was broken off accidentally and showed an unerupted canine in the maxilla. Specimen BPI 3589 has a
small erupted canine on one side only. Both the other
specimens are tusked. Specimen 3586, the largest in the
series, has caniniform processes that are much larger than
those of specimens with smaller tusks. The caniniform
processes are relatively much smaller than those of later
genera such as Daptocephalus and Kannemeyeria.
The interorbital region is slightly wider than the intertemporal region, and widens posteriorly. A wide strip of
the parietals is exposed between the postorbitals posterior
to the parietal foramen.
The parietal foramen is placed fairly far forward on the
intertemporal bar close to a line drawn between the postorbital arches. The parietal foramen is elongate. A low
boss is formed on the preparietal which forms the anterior
margin of the parietal foramen.
The zygomatic arches bow out laterally to give the skull
a similar shape to that of Rhachiocephalus.
It is difficult to determine whether the skull was as flat
as that of Rhachiocephalus or higher, like that of Daptocephalus, as all specimens are deformed. The general
impression is that the skull was slightly higher than that of

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

Oudenodon baini.
Ventral view (Fig. 3)
The anterior part of the palate is not as deep as in many
other dicynodont genera such as Diictodon and Daptocephalus. This feature is, however, highly variable in this
series of skulls because of the great variability encountered in the size of the caniniform processes.
The relationships of the bones in the palatal region are
very similar to that found in Daptocephalus.
The premaxilla displays the two anterior palatal ridges
with a deep groove between them as is found in most Dicynodontia. The posterior median palatal ridge is continuous
with the vomer posteriorly and is highest at the level of the
anterior choanal slits. The premaxilla forms the greater
part of the secondary palate. The palatines do not constitute as great a part of the secondary palate as is the case in
forms such as Oudenodon and Rhachiocephalus. There is extensive contact between the premaxilla and the palatines.
The palatines have a similar configuration to the condition found in Daptocephalus. They form the lateral walls
of the anterior choanal slits and constitute part of the dorsal wall of the choanal depression.
The margins of the fenestra medio-palatinalis (interpterygoid vacuity) are very variable in the series of
specimens. In specimen BPI 3585 the fenestra is nearly
half as long as the choanal depression. In the other three
specimens the fenestra is about one third the length of the
choanal depression and placed far back in it. The fenestra
is laterally bounded by the divided posterior plates of the
vomer, which project ventrally below the roof of the choanal depression, thus bringing the opening of the fenestra to the level of the pterygoids. A similar condition is
found in Daptocephalus.
The condition of the fenestra in Odontocyclops and Daptocephalus closely approximates that found in Triassic
Dicynodontia and contrasts sharply with the long fenestra
without raised margins encountered in most other Permian Dicynodontia.
The pterygoids meet the maxilla at a point midway
along the choanae. The ectopterygoids separate the ptery-

goids from the maxilla on the external sides ~mly. of th.e
palatine rami of the pterygoids. The pterygoId gIrder IS
much narrower than is found in Daptocephalus.
In general it can. be said that the relationship.s ?f the
bones on the ventral side of the skull are very slmtiar to
those found in Daptocephalus and that the differences
found can mostly be related to the relatively larger inter.
temporal region of Odontocyclops.
The epipterygoid has an unusual feature that. IS ~ot encountered in many other Permian DicynodontIa, In that
the footplate has a long anterior extension that extends
forward and meets the presphenoid part of the sphenethmoid. This part of the epipterygoid differs from the condition found in Daptocephalus where an additional dorsal
process is formed on the anterior ramus of the epipterygoid. In most Permian dicynodonts the anterior ramus of
the epipterygoid is very short.

Remarks
In Zambia, the genus Odontocyclops nov. is found associated with the zone fossil Cistecephalus microrhinus Owen.
Cistecephalus is never associated with specimens of Daptocephalus in the Karoo Basin. It can, therefore, be as~umed
that locality 4 in the Madumabisa Mudstone is older than
the Daptocephalus zone of South Africa. This can be substantiated too by the presence there of a large number of
small endothiodonts which are rare in the Daptocephalus
zone.
The genus Odontocyclops has many features in common
with Daptocephalus and can, therefore, be considered as a
possible ancestor to that genus. These are:
(a) The small posteriorly placed fenestra medio-palatinalis of which the vomers form the raised margins.
(b) The anterior process of the footplate of the epipterygoid.
(c) The large posterior extension of the premaxilla in the
secondary palate.
(d) Reduction of the ectopterygoid.
(e) The high placement of the external nares in the snout
and the sutural contact of the septomaxilla with the
maxilla.
(f) The small size of the parietal foramen and the lack of a
large bony boss surrounding the foramen.
In the above features, Odontocyclops shows agreement
with the genera Daptocephalus, Dinanomodon and the Triassic dicynodonts. The features in the above list are shared
with very few other Permian Dicynodontia. In some respects Odontocyclops retains a number of primitive characters that are more typical of Permian Dicynodontia. These
features may be termed primitive as they are of rare occurrence in the more advanced Triassic Dicynodontia. Those
particularly relate to the general proportions of the skull.
The intertemporal region is long and the snout is short,
which indicates that the temporalis musculature still functioned like that in typical Permian genera, such as Rhachiocephalus and Oudenodon. The intertemporal region is
relatively very broad when compared with the Triassic
genera.
Notwithstanding the many characters possessed by
Odontocyclops which make it an attractive ancestor to Daptocephalus, the following features show it to be, in fact,
too specialised to be the actual ancestor, viz. the concavity
of the dorsal surface of the snout, the broad intertemporal
region and the very large size of the forms presently
known. The ancestor of Daptocephalus must, therefore,
have been a form similar to Odontocyclops dubius but without the above specialisations.
In general it can be said that Triassic Dicynodontia are
characterised by having long snouts and short crested intertemporal regions. Functionally this means that the main
mass of the adductor musculature was more dorsally
placed (Crompton and Hotton, 1967). A large number of

ORIGINS AND CLASSIFICATION OF TRIASSIC DICYNODONTS

other specialisations that occur in few of the Permian dicyn~
odonts also occur, many of which are already found in
two genera from the Daptocephalus zone of the Beaufort
group - Daptocephalus and Dinanomodon.

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

C. Genus Daptocephalus Van Hoepen, 1934
Type Species: Daptocephalus leoniceps (Owen), 1876
The cranial morphology of the genus Daptocephalus has
been well described by Ewer (1961) and redescription of

85

the morphology would entail needless repetition. Only the
more salient features need be pointed out here as Daptocephalus is in many ways morphologically intermediate
between Odontocyc!ops and many of the dinodontosaurine
dicynodonts of the Triassic (see below). The specimen
described by Ewer was laterally compressed. The figures
given here are of a less distorted specimen of the Geological Survey collection, No. R31.
The stratigraphic occurrence of the genus also fits in

Figures S--8
Daprocephalus leolliceps (Owen). Geo!. Survey No. R.31. Viewed on dorsal, lateral, palatal and occipital aspects respectively. (Scale 0,25 approximately)

TRANSACTIONS OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF SOUTH AFRICA

86

with this interpretation as the Daptocephalus zone occurs
above the strata that contain Cistecephalus (age of Odontocyclops) and immediately below the lowermost Triassic
strata of the Lystrosaurus zone (Kitching, 1971, 1977). Features of Daptocephalus that can be regarded as advanced
with respect to the Permian, and leading on to the Triassic
dicynodonts, are the following:
1. Relatively long snout with large caniniform processes.
2. Long secondary palate formed mainly by the premaxilla with the palatines contributing very little to the
secondary palate.
3. Pterygoids meet the maxillae anteriorly. The ectopterygoids are small, thin elements separating the pterygoids
from the maxillae on the lateral sides of the palatine
rami of the pterygoids.
4. The fenestra medio-palatinalis is relatively small
(smaller than that of Odontocyclops) and placed far back
in the choanal depression. The lateral margins of the
fenestra consist of raised plates of the vomer that extend ventrally to the level of the ventral surface of the
pterygoids.
5. The "pterygoid girder" is much wider than in Odontocyclops and almost as wide as the girder in Kannemeyeria.
6. The temporal fossae are much shorter than those of

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

Odontocyclops.
7. The intertemporal region of Daptocephalus is narrow
and forms a sharp crest with the postorbitals meeting in
the midline behind the parietal foramen. The postorbitals are long and meet the squamosal posteriorly.
8. There is no boss surrounding the parietal foramen which is
relatively small.
9. There is no medial longitudinal ridge on the dorsal surface of the premaxilla as is seen in many Permian dicynodonts, e.g. Oudenodon and Rhachiocephalus or the
Triassic kannemeyerines.
Some broad-snouted specimens of Daptocephalus from
the northern part of the Karoo Basin in the Orange Free
State and Natal (Daptocephalus zone) that are being studied by Dr J. W. Kitching of the Bernard Price Institute for
Palaeontological Research, may prove to be a new species
of Daptocephalus which could be intermediate between
Daptocephalus leoniceps and Odontocyclops.
Casts of Dicynodon annae that have been received from
Russia without any locality data, in the British Museum
(Natural History) and the Palaeontological Institute in
Tubingen, closely resemble Daptocephalus leoniceps. The
genus limusaria from Shansi, People's Republic of China,
also appears to have the same level of organisation as Daptocephalus. Small specimens of a very Daptocephalus-like
anomodont occur in the Cistecephalus zone of the Lower
Beaufort near Pearston in the Cape Province, but their
true identity has not yet been elucidated (Kitching, pers.
comm.).
It is also possible that the generic name Daptocephalus
could become a junior synonym of the genus Dicynodon.
There can, however, be no certainty about this until such
time as the generotype of the genus Dicynodon, Dicynodon
lacerticeps, has been studied adequately. It is possible that
it could be a young individual of the species that is currently known as Daptocephalus leoniceps.
D. Genus Dinanomodon Broom, 1938
Type species: Dinanomodon rubidgei Broom, 1938
This genus differs from Daptocephalus principally in the
very peculiar specialisation of the tip of the snout. In Dinanomodon the tip of the snout is pointed, with a prominent
ridge on the dorsal surface of the premaxilla, so that it
looks very much like the inverted bow of a boat. If only
the type of Dinanomodon rubidgei had been known this
peculiarity could have been considered to be due to lateral
compression of the tip of the snout in a Daptocephalus-like
skull. However, several other specimens are known from

the Daptocephalus zone in the Graaff-Reinet district and
along the Orange River in the Orange Free State, which
are now housed in the National Museum, Bloemfontein.
There can, therefore, be no reasonable doubt that the condition of the snout in Dinanomodon rubidgei is, in fact,
natural.
The relationships of the various elements on the ventral
surface of the skull are so similar to those found in Daptocephalus that description would be mere repetition.
Despite the beak-like anterior tip of the premaxilla, the
anterior palatal ridges are developed in exactly the same
way as in Daptocephalus. The fenestra medio-palatinalis is
also very small. The anterior ramus of the footplate of the
epiterygoid also has a dorsal process as is found in Dapto-

cephalus.
The intertemporal region is very narrow and the postorbitals meet in the midline. The intertemporal region is
relatively longer than that of Daptocephalus.
The more pointed snout found in Dinanomodon with the
prominent medial ridge on its dorsal surface, indicates
closer relationship with the younger genus Kannemeyeria
rather than with the Dinodontosaurus group of Triassic
Dicynodontia.
It has proved almost impossible to provide a view of the
occiput of Dinanomodon rubidgei owing to the very damaged state of the type and the fact that it is embedded in
plaster of Paris. A subjective assessment of the occiput of
this species indicates that it may have some resemblance to
that of the Upper Triassic form Ischigualastia.

E. Genus Dinodontosaurus Romer, 1943
Type species: Dinodontosaurus turpior (Huene)
Four species of this genus have been described and the
genus Chanaria Cox (1968) is possibly a junior synonym of
Dinodontosaurus (see Keyser, 1974).
Dinodontosaurus resembles Daptocephalus in many
respects. The sutural relationships of the bones on the
palatal surface are essentially the same as in this genus.
The relative length of the snout and, consequently, the
length of the secondary palate is much longer in Dinodontosaurus. Both genera have much reduced, laterally
placed ectopterygoids.
The skull of Dinodontosaurus is much higher than that of
Daptocephalus, but the most noticeable feature that distinguishes the two genera is, however, the very short intertempo:oal region and temporal fossae of Dinodontosaurus.
The great relative length of the snout in this genus is concomitant with the shortening of the interpterygoid region.
The high skull with short intertemporal fossae was certainly developed to achieve a more vertical placement of
the adductor musculature and led to a greater reduction in
the length of the postorbitals which do not extend farther
posteriorly than the parietal foramen, in contrast to the
condition in Daptocephalus where the postorbitals meet the
squamosals above the occipital plate.
The fenestra medio-palatinalis is even further reduced
in Dinodontosaurus. The development of very large canine
tusks, from. which the genus derives its name, has led to
the formatIOn of very deep caniniform processes with
sharp anterior edges. This trend seems associated with the
shortening of the temporal fenestrae as these features are
all intimately linked with mastication.
!h~ do.rsal process of the anterior ramus of the epipterygOld IS thickened and is developed into a small boss.
Thu.s t~e g~nus Dinodontosaurus can be regarded as typical .Tnassl~ dlcynodonts which possess all the characters associated. With the advanced types of the Upper Triassic. It
occ~rs In the Santa Maria Formation of Brazil and the
Ischlchuca and Ischigualasto Formations of the IschiguaI~sto Basin of Argentina (Bonaparte, 1971). These formations are generally considered to be Upper Triassic in age.

87

ORIGINS AND CLASSIFICATION OF TRIASSIC DICYNODONTS

...

'

)/'

I'

/

II

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

}
j

~
sq

\

.I
/

./

\

./

\ ., ---_.---

i

-

,.,.~,

... ~

,/

Figures 9-11
Dinanomodon rubidgei Broom. Rubidge Collection No.9. Viewed in dorsal. lateral and palalal aspects respeclively. (Scale 0,25 approximately)

TRANSACTIONS OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF SOUTH AFRICA

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

88

Figures 12-15
Dinodontosaurus turpior (Huene). Reconstructed from various sources. Viewed in dorsal, lateral, palatal and occipital aspects respectively.

(Scale 0,166 approximately)

F. Genus Kannemeyer;a Seeley
Tvpe species: Kannemeyeria simocephala (Weithofer), 1888
Kannemeyeria was the first Triassic dicynodont to become known to science. The osteology of the genus is well
known through the work of Pearson (1924). This genus can
be regarded as typical of a large group of Triassic Dicynodontia and, as reviewed above, has been variously referred
to either the Family Kannemeyeridae von Huene or Cox,
or Subfamily "Kannemeyeroinae" Lehman.
The most notable features of the skull in this genus are
the high, crested intertemporal region and the pointed anterior tip of the snout.
The intertemporal region is relatively short and the
occiput fairly low and wide when compared to a form like

Dinodonrosaurus. The postorbitals extend behind the
parietal foramen and barely meet the squamosals. The high
intertemporal crest indicates that at least the adductor
externus medialis muscles functioned in a more vertical
direction than was the case in most other dicynodonts.
As is found in all of the Triassic genera the fenestra
medio-palatinalis is very small and placed far back in the
choanal depression. The footplate of the epipterygoid is
expanded in an anterior direction and has a prominent
dorsal process.
The anterior tip of the premaxilla is pointed almost as
much as that of Dinanomodon. This stands in sharp contrast to the condition seen in Dinodontosaurus and Dolichuranus and in the latter two genera there is no prominent

ORIGINS AND CLASSIFICATION OF TRIASSIC DICYNODONTS

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

medial ridge on the dorsal surface of the premaxilla. In
Kannemeyeria. as in Dinanomodon, this ridge is very
strongly developed, with the function of adding mechanical strength to the sharp point of the premaxilla. This adaptation is not necessary for a broad square snout like that
of Dinodontosaurus.
The bone on the surface of the snout has an irregularly
pitted surface which could indicate that the horny covering of the upper jaws extended on to this part of the skull,
and the caniniform processes are very large in this genus.
This latter results in a very deep palate. The palatine bones
are relatively small and the premaxilla extends far back,
forming most of the secondary palate.

89

The external nares are placed high up in the snout, far
above the alveolar margin. The septomaxilla is fused to the
maxilla.

Discussion
The Triassic Dicynodontia, exclusive of the Lystrosauridae and other, minor, groups are a diverse group of
specialised herbivores which have been divided into three
broad categories to which Cox (1965) accorded familial
status. These were:
(a) Kannemeyeridae - genera with pointed snouts and
high crested intertemporal regions and high, relatively

(

\\.

Figures 1~19
Kannemeveria cn~~/Qrhvnchus (R.C). Geol. Survey No. R313. Viewed in dorsal. lateral, palatal and occipital aspects respectively. (Scale 0.25

approximalely)

.

TRANSA(TIONS OF THF GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF SOUTH AFRICA

90

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

narrow, occiputs, e.g. Kannemeyeria. Sinokannemeyeria.
Parakannemeyeria. Ischigualastia and PlaceriaL
(b) Stahleckeridae - genera with low, wide, occipital surfaces, short intertemporal regions and broad squaretipped snouts, e.g. Dinodonlosaurus and Stahleckeria.
(c) Shansiodontidae
more primitive Triassic dicynodonts which do not clearly belong in one of the two
other families.
This was interpreted as two separate lineages descended
from a primitive, more generalised, group (Cox. 1965).
In an earlier paper (Keyser, 1974) one of the authors
pointed out eight evolutionary trends encountered in the
Triassic dicynodonts, which have been reviewed on pp. 84 and
89 above. The' evaluation of the features that are involved in
these trends naturally leads to a search for some of the above
advanced characters among the large variety of more
primitive Permian dicynodonts.
As most Triassic dicynodonts are tusked, only tusked
forms from the Cistecephalus zone can be considered as
likely ancestors. As discussed above, Odonlocyc/opS has
several features that are found in Triassic dicynodonts; it
has canine tusks, the fenestra medio-palatinalis is small
and has raised margins within the choanal depression, the

septomaxilla is fused to the maxilla. the external nares a.re
situated high in the snout far above the alveola.r margl~,
and the anterior ramus of the footplate of the epJpterygOid
has characters indicative of an amnity with the Triassic
Dicynodontia. Odontocyclops has more features in common with the genus Daptocephalus and Dinanomodon of
the succeeding DaplOcephalus zone than any other known
dicynodont from the Cistecephalus zone. It is. therefore,
likely that Odonlocyclops must be closely related to the dicynodont stock that gave rise to the genera DaplOcephalLL~
and Dinanomodon. The large elongate nasal bosses that
occur in Odontocyc/ops are not found in the two later genera where the bosses are small and only developed above
the external nares. The occurrence of these large elongate
bosses in Odonlocyc/opS are indicative of specialisation and
excludes it from direct ancestry to either DaptocephalLL~ or
Dinanomodon. However. substantial bosses occur in
several broad-snouted Triassic genera, e.g. Dolichuranlls,
Rhinodicynodon and Tetragonias.
G. The Origirl of Kannemeyeria
Dinanomodon has a sharply pointed snout, and a similar
structure is encountered in Kannemeyeria. A prominent
ridge is formed on the dorsal surface of the premaxilla to
strengthen the pointed tip. The palate of Dinanomodon
does not differ very much from that of Odon/ocyc/ops except that the premaxilla is very much longer because of
the longer snout. The fenestra medio-palatinalis is even
smaller in Dinanomodon than in Daptocephalus and is
placed far back in the choanal depression, the floor of

. 1. . '
'-./ I ~.,

Figure 20

Antero-lateral views of skulls of ischfgualaslia (a) and Stahleckeria
(b) in the Instituto Lillo, Tucuman and the Paleozoologie
Museum. Tubingen. respectively.

.
.
Figure 21
Famll.Y Tree of dlcynodonts discussed in this paper. (A) D/cynodol/
lacerllceps <;>We.n; (8) DapLOcephalus leoniceps (Owen); (C) Dinancr
modon ,:,bldge,. B~oom~ (0) Kannemeyeria cristarhYllchus (R.C);
(E) IschlguaJas,tta je'!-f~nJ Cox; (F) Dolichuranus primaevus Keyser;
(G) Tetragomas IljaJllus (Huene); (H) DinodontOSOUnLs fllrpior
(Huene); (I) Odontocydops dub/us (Boonstra) gen. nov.

See Table III for stratigraphic distribution of the larger Triassic
genera.

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

ORIGINS AND CLASSIFICATION OF TRIASSIC DICYNODONTS

which gradually becomes shallower in a posterior direction, thus bringing the opening of the fenestra medio-palatinalis to the level of the ventral surface of the pterygoid
girder. Dinanomodon differs from Kannemeyeria mainly in
the much longer temporal region of the former genus. The
intertemporal bar of Dinanomodon forms a high dorsal
crest as is the case in Kannemeyeria. Kannemeyeria can be
derived from Dinanomodon by shortening the intertemporal region (Fig. 21).
Dinanomodon is separated from Kannemeyeria by a considerable gap in time. Dinanomodon occurs in the Daptocephalus zone, which is separated from the Cynognathus zone
by the Lystrosaurus zone. No large Dicynodontia other than
Lystrosaurus are known from this zone.
Kannemeyeria-like dicynodonts were extremely successful and achieved wide geographical distributions. The
genus Kannemeyeria itself is known from the Beaufort
Group of South Africa, the Omingonde Formation of
South West Africa, the Ntawere Formation of Zambia, the
Yerrapalli Formation of India, the Manda Beds of Tanzania and the Puesto Viejo Formation of Argentina. Dicynodonts that are very similar to Kannemeyeria are also known
from China and Russia. Many of the genera that have
been described from these countries are so similar to Kannemeyeria that it is likely that many of them will be included in the same genus (see below).
The highly specialised Upper Triassic genera Ischigualastia from the Ischigualasto and Santa Maria Beds of
South America, and the genus Placerias from the Chinle
Formation of the United States of America, resemble the
kannemeyerids in having narrow and/or crested intertemporal regions and pointed snouts. No intermediate forms
between them and Kannemeyeria have yet been found and
their inclusion in a separate family is merely a matter of
convenience (see below).

H. The Origin of Dinodontosaurus
The genus Daptocephalus can be derived from an Odontocyclops-like form by reduction of the intertemporal bar
and concomitant elongation of the snout. Daptocephalus
retains the square tip of the premaxilla as found in Odonto-

cyclops.
Several authors have stated that Daptocephalus could be
ancestral to many of the Triassic Dicynodonia, e.g. Camp
(1956), Ewer (1961), Cruickshank (1967), Crompton and
Hotton (1967) and Cluver (1971). These authors based this
view on the relative proportions of the skull, which in
many ways resembles the skull of Kannemeyeria.
It is here thought that Daptocephalus is already advanced
on a line leading to the dinodontosaurid dicynodonts and
is not on the lineage leading to Kannemeyeria, because of
its broad square-tipped snout which contrasts sharply with
the snout of the kannemeyerids where a pointed tip of the
premaxilla with a prominent ridge on the dorsal surface
of the bone is developed. No ridge is developed on the anterior and dorsal surfaces of the premaxilla in Dapto-

cephalus.
A series of genera leading from Daptocephalus through
the shansiodonts Dolichuranus and Tetragonias to Dinodontosaurus (Fig. 21) can be arranged as an evolutionary lineage. The relative ages of the strata from which the fossils
were collected is in agreement with the serial arrangement. In Fig. 21 it can be seen that the main trend in this
group is the shortening of the intertemporal region. During this development the posterior ramus of the postorbital
in the intertemporal region becomes very short. In Daptocephalus the postorbital extends back to meet the occipital part of the squamosal. In Dolichuranus (Keyser, 1973)
and Tetragonias (Cruickshank, 1967) the postorbital extends back to a level behind the parietal foramen while in
Dinodontosaurus the postorbitals hardly take part in the
formation of the intertemporal bar.

91

The relationships of the various bones in the palate and
choanal region had already been established in Daptocephalus and underwent very little change during the evolution of the group. In this lineage the palatal portion of
the skull increases with the increase in snout length. The
size of the fenestra medio-palatinalis is progressively reduced.
There are a large number of other dinodontosaurid dicynodonts which could possibly have been included in this
lineage but of which too little is known for certainty. The
genus Vinceria (Bonaparte, 1971) which seems very similar
to both Shansiodon and Tetragonias, lived contemporaneously with Kannemeyeria in the Puesto Viejo Formation
of Argentina. It is morphologically intermediate between
Daptocephalus and Dolichuranus. However, the available
descriptions and drawings of the genus Shansiodon Yeh are
adequate to place it within the lineage with certainty but
it appears to occupy the same level of organisation as

Tetragonias.
The various dinodontosaurid genera are very similar to
one another and it would be very difficult to distinguish
the anterior half of a skull of anyone of them from
another, had only these been preserved.

III. PREVIOUS CLASSIFICATIONS
A. General Review
Depending on the amount of information available and
the predelictions of individual palaeontologists, among
other variables, the Triassic anomodonts have been assigned to anything from one to four families. The only
family of these fossils which has not been subject to much
doubt is the Lower Triassic Lystrosauridae (Cluver, 1971),
anomodonts of a peculiar and distinct specialisation which
can be regarded for these purposes as representing the
most highly specialised lineage of dicynodonts. They must
trace their ancestry into the Permian and do not give rise
to any other group.
The most common way of treating the large Triassic
anomodonts, in the days when but a few were known, was
to include them all in one family. Thus Von Huene (1948,
pp. 79-80), in his suborder Anomodontia, has six families
(Endothiodontidae, Dicynodontidae, Cistecephalidae,
Geikiidae, Lystrosauridae and Kannemeyeridae). The distinction between the families Dicynodontidae and Kannemeyeridae in this scheme would be seen to rest on the
presence in the latter, of a high, narrow parietal region,
nasals longer than frontals, up to eight sacral ribs and a
high olecranon ulnae. The presence in most of strong
tusks, weak hind legs and flat digging claws could not be
considered distinctive for this family, as they occur in
others, according to Von Huene (op. cit., p. 80).
Furthermore, high, narrow parietal crests are almost
solely the prerogative of Kannemeyeria itself, and on this
basis several genera (e.g. Stahleckeria and Dinodontosaurus
would have had to be excluded.
Romer (1956), on the other hand, retained Kannemeye-

ria. Dinodontosaurus. Placerias. Rhadiodromus. Sinokannemeyeria and Stahleckeria as genera of equal standing, with
Permian dicynodonts in the single family Dicynodontidae,
which he noted (op. cit., p. 706) as being characterised in
the following way:
"Molar teeth absent, post-frontal frequently absent.
Probably including several independent lines developed from a primitive endothiodont stock."
In the same year, Camp (1956, pp. 305-341) compared
most of the then known Triassic anomodonts in a diffuse
and complicated analysis and in the abstract (p. 305) noted
that:
"Detailed morphological evidence indicates that the
large Middle and Upper Triassic dicynodonts of
North and South America, as well as the genus Kannemeyeria ... may belong to a single group: the family

92

TRANSACTIONS OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF SOUTH AFRICA

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

Kannemeyeridae ... the South American stahleckerians have diverged in one direction and the North
American Placerias in another, although in some
"conservative" features Placerias lies between the
African and South American forms ... "
Camp makes two further statements which are worth recording. On page 325:
"If it can be granted that the genera of "kannemeyerids" form a natural group, it remains to be
shown to what degree they are related."
This is followed on page 327 by:
"The interrelationships of these three genera within
the family are less certain than their unity."
But the implication throughout this work is that the Triassic anomodonts are all members of the family Kannemeyeridae, but showing trends in two directions.
Lehman (in Piveteau, 1961, pp. 271-322) reviewed the
Anomodontia and on pp. 321-322 deals specifically with
the family Kannemeyeridae. He clearly follows Camp's
suggestions as to relationship, but goes one step further
and formally erects two subfamilies to accommodate the
trends noted by Camp.
I. The "Kannemeyeroinae" to accommodate those forms
with ... "Antero-postero elongation of the squamosals
with elevation of the parietal crest"
i.e. Kannemeyeria and Placerias
2. The "Stahleckeroinae" to accommodate those forms
with ... "an apparent lateral expansion of the squamosals on the occipital surface"
i.e. Stahleckeria
However, the distinction of occipital proportions seems to
be no longer valid (Table I).
TABLE I
Occipital Width : Height Indices for Triassic Dicynodonts
Category I. Very wide occiput of width : height index > 1,5 : I
Kannemeyeria simocephala
1,6 : I Cruickshank, 1965
K annemeyeria simocephala
1,64 : I Cruickshank, 1970
Dinodontosaurus turpior
1,64 : I Cox, 1965
Dinodontosaurus turpior
1,75 : I Cox, 1965
Zambiasaurus submersus
1,81 : I Cox, 1969
Stahleckeria potens
1,92 : I Cox, 1969
TetraRonias nialilu~
1,82 : I Cruickshank, 1967
TetraRonias nialilus
1,61 : I Von Huene, 1942
S inokannemeyeria vin[?chiaoensis
2,15 : I Sun, 1963
Parakannemeyeria ningwuensis
1,66 : I Sun, 1963
Shansiodon wangi
1,55 : I Sun, 1959
D inodontosaurus platyceps
I ,71 : I Cox, 1968
Kannemeyeria crL~tarhynchus
1,66 : I Crozier, 1970
Dolichuranus latirostris
1,51 : I Crozier, 1970
Category 2. Occiputs of width : height index < 1,5 : I but > 1,2 : I
Ischigualastia jenseni
1,22 : I Cox, 1965
Parakannemeyeria youngi
1,48 : I Sun, 1963
Parakannemeyeria dolichocephala
1,29 : I Sun, 1963
Wadiasaurus indicus
1,42 : I Roy Chowdhury, 1970
Shansiodon wuhsiangensis
1,45 : I Sun, 1959
Dinodontosaurus brevirostris
1,5 : 1 Cox, 1968
Dinodontosaurus brevirostris
1,46 : 1 Cox, 1968
Category 3. Very high occiputs of width: height index < 1,2 : 1
Placerias gigas
I ,18 : I Cox, 1965
Dolichuranus primaevus
1,08 : 1 Keyser, 1973
K ennemeyeria argentinensis
1,17 : I Bonaparte, 1966

These trends or adaptations were linked to masticatory
processes, a thought that was elaborated by Cox (1965, pp.
502-506) who raised the status of Lehman's subfamilies to
that of familial level, creating the Kannemeyeridae and
Stahleckeridae to accommodate these forms. By this date
the number and variety of described Triassic anomodonts
had grown considerably beyond those known by Camp,
and Cox was thus able to add another family, the Shansiodontidae, for those forms with neither of the specialisations recorded for the previous families.
Other reasons which Cox (1965, p. 502) used to link the
Triassic Dicynodontia were:
" ... the presence of a separately ossified olecranon
process on the ulna ... " ("a notable feature") and "a
well developed pubic tubercle ... land] '" the inturning of the dorsal edge of the ischium."

Cox summarised his analysis of the postcranial features of
these animals thus:
"As can be seen, this comparison .,. does not
provide any immediately apparent pattern. of
relationships between the genera except that Smokannemeyeria, Parakannemeyeria, Kannemeyeria and
Placerias all have similar scapulae ... "
For cranial features Cox noted:
"In Kannemeyeria the snout tapers anteriorly to a
blunt point. The jaw muscles originate from the front
face of an occipital plate which has been greatly
heightened postero-dorsally. As a result, the tempo~al
vacuity appears quite long in dorsal view and the Intertemporal bar in lateral view projects above the
level of the rest of the skull as a high median crest.
The occiput is as high as it is broad.
"In Stahleckeria the snout is extremely wide and
blunt. The jaw muscles originate from the front face
of an occipital plate which has been greatly widened
by the lateral extension of the squamosals. As a result
the temporal opening appears comparatively short in
dorsal view and the intertemporal bar in lateral view
hardly projects above the level of the rest of the skull.
The occiput is wide and low."
Using these summaries of characters, Cox nevertheless
did not formally define the three families he proposed,
only saying:
"Having recognised the divergent adaptations of Kannemeyeria and Stahleckeria ... " (p. 502) "these must
surely be correlated with differences in their diet and
mode of feeding" (p. 505).
In summary we accept that the presence of a separately
ossified olecranon process of the ulna in most of the larger
Triassic dicynodonts is an important character. We do not
accept that the characters of the scapulae help in understanding relationships within the group as a whole and thus
the one feature which can be applied universally within
the larger Triassic dicynodonts is the contrast in snout
shape between the Kannemeyeria-like genera and those
with broad snouts, which seem to be in the majority.
Romer (1966) followed Cox's classification, noting
within the Infra-order Dicynodontia the families Endothiodontidae, Dicynodontidae, Lystrosauridae, Kannemeyeridae, Stahleckeridae and Shansiodontidae. In this
sense, the first two are Permian in age and the last four
Triassic.
Much at the same time as Cox published his proposals,
Cruickshank (1964, 1967 and 1968) suggested another approach to the problem, which tacitly assumed a close relationship of all the larger Triassic dicynodonts. In these
papers it was proposed that the ancestral Triassic dicynodont was one of the less specialised members of the genus
Lystrosaurus, and that the large Triassic dicynodonts
evolved from a Daptocephalus-like form, through an
aquatic stage represented by Lystrosaurus, to emerge
eventually as fully terrestrial forms by the end of the
Lower Triassic. It is clear that Lystrosaurus shows several
of the features possessed by the more typical Triassic
dicynodonts (e.g. very short fenestra medio-palatinales;
"X"-shaped interclavicle; reduced ectopterygoids and
postfrontals), but it is now equally clear that this genus
represents the most specialised lineage of dicynodonts and
that it is a sterile offshoot of some Late Permian relative of

Daptocephalus.
Earlier than Cox, Sun (1963) summarised a set of views
on the relationships among the kannemeyerids following
Camp's scheme. Some of her points are important (p. 107),
e.g. Placerias is thought to represent a branch which was
derived early from the kannemeyerid ancestor and
evolved along a different line from the others. In doing
this, certain primitive characters were retained, e.g. small
nasal, relatively large lacrimal, retention of postfrontal

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

ORIGINS AND CLASS I FICATION OF TRIASSIC DICYNODONTS

and tabular. Specialisations included the reduction of the
tusks, thickening of the posterior border of the squamosal
and the upward extension of the ilium.
The Chinese genera described by Sun are thought, by
Sun, to have a closer relationship to Kannemeyeria than
does Placerias, a thought not out of keeping, considering
their relative ages. Sun lists several characters which are
held in common between Kannemeyeria and the Chinese
kannemeyerids, viz. moderate expansion of the squamosal, without thickened rim; rather extended basicranial
axis; postorbital and squamosals meet; developed maxillary process and tusk. It was also thought, by Sun, that
Kannemeyeria, Sinokannemeyeria and Parakannemeyeria
were at approximately the same level of evolution.
Sun's opinion was that Sinokannemeyeria was perhaps
even less evolved than Kannemeyeria, though not significantly so. In her view (and she followed Camp in this) the
low, broad skull with relatively broad temporal region and
snout and the round maxillary process all indicated a more
primitive stage of evolution than the condition in Kannemeyeria. To the above features were added notochordal
pits in the vertebrae, a "c1eithral groove" (Cruickshank,
1964, 1967) on the scapula and a shorter and more compact humerus. Kannemeyeria itself was considered specialised in its long, high parietal crest and Parakannemeyeria
by a high curved skull with its unique parietal crest characters.
Stahleckeria was thought to be an early derivative of the
Kannemeyeria--Sinokannemeyeria line, sharing with the latter a broad, low skull, laterally expanded squamosal and a
low, broad occipital plate. The presence in Stahleckeria of
a small maxillary process, without a tusk, was not thought
significant enough to separate it from the line as envisaged
by Sun. The broad, thick nasal with a thin, occipital rim of
the squamosal was thought sufficient to separate Stahleckeria from Placerias and was used by Sun to indicate a
closer relationship between Stahleckeria and Kannemeyeria
than between Placerias and Kannemeyeria. In conclusion,
Dinodontosaurus was recognised as being more closely related to the Chinese kannemeyerid genera than to Stahleck-

eria.
In retrospect, Sun's analysis of the relationships of the
larger Triassic dicynodont genera suffered from her not
apparently being aware of Lehman's work. The Chinese
Triassic dicynodonts do not seem to have a "narrow,
rounded snout" of the same type as Kannemeyeria itself, as
is implied by Cox in his classification (op. cit., p. 508) and
thus we prefer to link them to such broad-snouted forms as
Dinodontosaurus, as Sun suggested in her original description. The similarities she recognised between the various
Triassic dicynodont lineages, we regard as reinforcing the
concept of a single, unified family, with two or three main
co-evolving lines or subfamilies.
Cruickshank (1967) also recognised the great similarity
of the Chinese genera and Dinodontosaurus. In a later
paper this author summarised many of the points enumerated above in a "family tree" (Cruickshank, 1970, Fig. 4).
This summary, following on a review of the genus Kannemeyeria, was the best available at the time, but was inadequate in several respects, particularly in the misinterpretation of the structure of the skull of the animal assigned to
the genus Proplacerias nov. (Cruickshank, 1972).
This scheme distinguished four colateral branches of
large Triassic dicynodonts, leading ultimately to (a) Placerias, (b) Kannemeyeria, (c) Tetragonias and (d) the stahleckerid'i. Without making a formal assessment on the
status of Kannemeyeria and Placerias, Cruickshank (1972) was
nevertheless able to say that " ... although Kannemeyeria and
Placerias are closely allied they represent two different
evolutionary trends ... "
Notwithstanding Sun's statement (op. cit., p. 107), Placerias may well represent the end point of the Kanne-

93

meyeria evolutionary line, where the caniniform processes
and reduced tusks could be undergoing a late reduction
from the condition seen in forms such as K. cristarhynchus
(Roy Chowdhury). We do not believe that Sinokannemeyeria, with many characters comparable to those of Dinodontosaurus, represents the basic stock from which the
other larger Triassic genera could evolve. In fact this scepticism is inherent in the belief that the two main Triassic
lineages can be traced to such genera as Daptocephalus and
Dinanomodon. Sinokannemeyeria represents part of the
broad-snouted evolutionary line, and is so treated in the
classification which follows.
Finally, Keyser (1974) discussed the overall evolutionary trends to be seen in Triassic dicynodonts. These
are (op. cit., p. 65):
I. Increase in total body size.
2. Increase in relative length of snout and secondary palate by backward growth of the premaxilla.
3. Reduction in the fenestra medio-palatinalis (interpterygoid space) and its posterior migration out of the
choanal depression.
4. Shortening and dorsal expansion of the intertemporal
bar with concomitant shortening of the temporal fossae.
5. Fusion of elements in the front part of the brain case.
6. Posterior migration of the lamina reflecta of the mandible.
7. Development of an anterior process on the quadrate,
which lies along the quadrate ramus of the pterygoid.
8. Disappearance of the quadrate foramen.
The first trend was recognised by several of the early
authors, and the second had been noted in part by Toerien
(1953). The third trend was noted by Camp (1956) and
elaborated on by Cruickshank (1967, 1968). One of the
most important trends commented on by Keyser (op. cit.),
is the fourth where the temporal fossae are noted as becoming shorter with time, in association with the shortening and dorsal expansion of the intertemporal bar. The
fusion of the anterior elements in the brain case can be associated with the change in direction of the "temporalis"
muscle stresses (Crompton and Hotton, 1967) and, Keyser
remarked, the backward migration of the reflected lamina
is associated with the elimination of the quadrate foramen.
Of all these trends, that concerning the development of an
anterior process on the quadrate (no. 7) seems to stand
alone. Keyser used the last character to help define the
subfamily lachelerinae nov. within the Family Kannemeyeridae Lehman, and concluded that because of the
many discoveries made subsequent to 1965
" ... major rethinking on the taxonomy of the group
has become necessary." (Keyser, 1974, p. 66).
B. The Status of the Families Kannemeyeridae
and Stahleckeridae Cox
Before discussing the overall classification of the Triassic dicynodonts, the first necessity is to look at the two
main families defined by Cox in 1965, as they seem to represent the clearest divergence of characters seen in the
Triassic. This classification is basically sound but needs reassessment. This has been done in part by Cruickshank
(1978), who has discussed the palaeoecology of Triassic dicynodonts. However, several instances will be cited here
of confusion which has arisen in referring specimens to the
families Stahleckeridae and Kannemeyeridae in particular, and to a lesser extent to the family Shansiodontidae
Cox.
It is coincidental that in 1970, Roy Chowdhury and Crozier both described specimens, from India and Zambia respectively, which were placed into the taxon Rechnisaurus
cristarhynchus Roy Chowdhury, a stachleckeriid, and
which was originally described from the Yerrapalli Formation. This is of approximately Anisian age (Anderson and

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

94

TRANSACTIONS OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF SOUTH AFRICA

Anderson, 1970) and, because another specimen was described later in the same year from the Zambian N'tawere
Formation (Locality 16: Crozier, 1970), both these geological horizons are thought to be of equivalent age. It is
thought that the N'tawere Formation in general is slightly
younger than the (?Scythian) Cynognathus zone of South
Africa, but older than the (?u. Anisian) Manda Formation
of Tanzania (Anderson and Anderson, 1970).
The genus Rechnisaurus is defined from the type and
only species, R. cristarhynchus, as being of moderately
large size (about 380 mm skull overall length) with large
canine teeth (?44 mm in diameter), wide interorbital
region and blunt snout with a strong median ridge on the
anterior and dorsal surfaces of premaxilla which continues
on to dorsal surfaces of nasal. This ridge is bounded by a
pair of deep depressions. The maxillae are produced into
powerful antero-ventrally directed caniniform processes
bearing rugose rounded Jlanges postero-ventrally. The
postorbital region is short, with short, wide temporal openings. The intertemporal bar is fairly narrow and dorsally
concave in section. The parietal crest is described as not
being high (but see below), with a low boss immediately
behind the pineal foramen. The parietals form most of the
intertemporal bar, and there is a sharp transition between
dorsal and occipital surfaces.
In comparing the Zambian specimen with the type, Crozier (1970, p. 39) concluded that:
"This specimen agrees in all particulars with the type
except for its size (465 mm) and the shape of the
snout." (which is pointed as opposed to blunt in the
type.)
Keyser (1973) described a fauna of approximately A nisian age from South West Africa and which contained a
specimen (1973, Fig. 3, R313) assigned tentatively to Kannemeyeria simocephala (Weit). The genus Kannemeyeria
Seeley is defined (Cruickshank, 1970) as follows:
"Medium to large sized skulls, tusked in both sexes.
Zygomatic arches parallel or sub-parallel in dorsal
view. Parietal crest high and narrow with no extensive exposure of interparietal on dorsal surface.
A large orbit dominating the facial region and a
relatively short precanine region of the snout.

Interpterygoid space
x 100 = 23-28 per cent.
distance between nostrils
Labial fossae may be universally present."
(The latter character is in fact the case.) Additionally K.
simocephala (Weit) has the following characters:
"Large skull (about 450 mm overall length) with horizontal Jlanges on maxillae and a prominent mid-nasal
ridge. Tusks run in line with jugal arch, though the
tips on emerging may turn sharply downward. Lower
jaw with normal up-turned tip. Prespinous fossa of
scapula large and anterior blade of ilium small."
(Cruickshank, 1970, pp. 50-51).
A close comparison of specimen R313 (Figs. 16-19) and
the Zambian specimen of R. cristarhynchus is effected
partly qualitatively and partly quantitatively in Table I I.
Bearing in mind the vastly different states of preservation
and the necessity of having to rely on reconstruction to obtain some values from the Zambian specimen, it is clear
that there is a great quantitative resemblance between
R313 and B.P.I. 3638. This confirms Keyser's opinion
(1974, p. 58) that:
" ... this genus (Rechnisaurus) had best be placed in
the family Kannemeyeridae and is probably a descendant of the genus Kannemeyeria. It is even doubtful
that a generic distinction can be upheld."
Qualitatively R313 and B.P.I. 3638 agree on the presence of the strong mid-nasal ridge flanked by depressions,
the strong caniniform processes and in their temporal
openings being shorter and their parietal crests not being
as high as might be expected in a typical K. simocephala.
The interpterygoid space : internal narial ratio for R313 is
anomalously high in comparison with all other Kannemeyeria specimens which are described, with the sole exception of the juvenile B.P.I. 2092. That of B.P.I. 3638 is
on the low side. In addition to the specific points enumerated above, it must be noted that they are both of approximately the same size in almost all dimensions, there only
being minor points of difference.
Taking the comparisons further and investigating the relationship of R313 and B.P.I.3638, using Kannemeyeria
specimens from the Beaufort series as a standard, it is seen

TABLE II
Some Characters of Kannemeyeria Specimens, in Millimetres

Geol. Surv.

Length: a. palatal midline
b. dorsal midline
c. over sq uamosal
wings
Width over squamosals
Interorbital distance
Internasal distance
Width of parietal crest at
level of pineal
Length behind postorbital
or dorsal midline
Length in front of postorbital or dorsal midline
Length of internal nares
Length of fenestra mediopalatinalis
Diameter of tusks
Horizontal diameter: orbit
Horizontal diameter: nares
Depth: caniniform process
Ipt. space
100
lnt. nares x
Preorbital len~th
100
Total mlalme engtll x

Univ. Calif.

Average adults
(excl. BPI 2092)
SWA &
Zambia
Beaufort

BPI 3638

R313

BPI 4523

42916

BPI 1168

BPI 2092

365
450*

355
409

359
436

371*
413*

346*
427

230
293

360
429,5

358,6
425,3

465*
454*
150
160

444
406
140
150

477
322
147
110

452*
388
170
100

449
360*
155
85*

315*
100
50*

454,5
430
145
155

459,3
356,6
157,3
98,3

53*

59

50

61

55

29*

56

55,3

140*

130

165

130*

175

113

135

156,6

310*
105

279
82

271
96

283*
77*

252

180
54

194,5
93,5

268,6
86,5

18
36,5 x 31
95
55
145

29
40 x 29
68
55
150

16
29 x 27
72
63
72

19*
22,5 x 18
78
46
104*

18
18 x 16
68*
37,5
61

23,5
38,25 x 30
81,5
55
147,5

17,5
26,8 x 23,6
78,3
52,3
95,3

17,6 %

35 %

16,7 %

24,5 %

33,5 t

26,3 %

20,6 %

69%

69 %

62,5 %

68 %

61,3 %

69%

63,2 %

* Estimate on damaged or distorted region

29 x 26
85
48
110

59%

95

ORIGINS AND CLASSI FICATION OF TRIASSIC DICYNODONTS

TABLE III
Stratigraphic Distribution of Triassic Dicynodonts

z

~

~
Z


Z


:r:

GENERA

z

Z

Ci5

~

u
CI:l

l
f
Kannemeyeria
l
Dolichuranus f
Kannemeyeria

0



-l

z

z


Z
cG

U

z

02

0

Z


~

II)

00



C
II)
.S
C

~



:r:

cG

0

U

Manda Fm

Tetragonias

Omingonde Fm

I

l

Kannemeyeria
Dolichuranus

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)



U. Beaufort

Kannemeyeria

Jacheleria -

~

I

J

Sanguasaurus

02

N'tawere Fm

r

Zambiasaurus



u

-- - -

---"

- -

- - - 1 - - - - - - - - - - - ---

Los Colorados

f-- - -

[
l -- - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - Santa Maria
Dinodontosaurus f I
Barysoma
l - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Ischigualasto
Ischigualastia
f
Ischichuca
---Dinodontosaurus _
- - --- -

Stahleckeria

-

I

I--

Kannemeyeria
Vinceria
Kannemeyeria
Wadiasaurus

}---

Yerrapalli
Fm.

:r:

~

0

CI:l

INDIA

J



Er-ma- Ying Fm

~

-

:r:
U

Chinle Fm.

Placerias
Uralokannemeyeria
Rabidosaurus
Rhinodicynodon
Rhadiodromus
Rhinocerocephalus

G



Puesto Viejo

Shansiodon

GEOL 82/1 -

~

~

I

Parakannemeyeria

Elephantosaurus

02

t- - -

l
f

Sinokannemeyeria



U

N. AMERICA

r-

I

J
J



Ci5

CI:l

I

:;
cG

-

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

96

TRANSACTIONS OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF SOUTH AFRICA

that certain differences do, in fact, exist between the Zambian and South West African specimens on the one hand,
and the Beaufort specimens on the other. This comparison
allows several explanations. The most obvious is that
the Beaufort Series specimens represent a true sample of
K. simocephalus (Weit) and the Zambian and South West
African specimens represent a sample of a population of an
entirely separate species. Supporting this explanation is
the markedly different pre-orbital proportions of the two
groups (with the exception of Specimen 42916) viz. 60 per
cent v. 69 per cent, allied with the markedly deeper caniniform processes in the later pair (average of 147 mm
compared with III mm average). Likewise the interorbital
distance of the Beaufort adults averages 158 mm and the
same measurement averages 145 mm in the others. There
is an inverse relationship with the internasal distance: the
Zambian and South West African pair have broader nasal
regions (average 155 mm) than the Beaufort (average
95 mm). The tusks of all the measured specimens have suffered damage of one kind or another, but it is clear that
while the Beaufort specimens have fully cylindrical tusks
of moderate diameter, the Zambian and South West
African specimens have tusks oval in section and much
heavier in structure. In the Zambian specimen, the reflected lamina of the angular touches the lateral condyle
of the articular, a progressive character (Keyser, 1974),
which is not preserved in the South West African specimen, because there is no lower jaw associated with it.
On the other hand, the heavy nose and tusks could indicate that these are male characters in very much the same
way as Cox (1965, p. 494) distinguished his "Old Bull" Dinodontosaurus turpior from other specimens of that species,
and as was done in a similar exercise by Cruickshank in
1967 for Tetragonias. However, in this study it is remarkable that the specimens fall into two groups, separable on
sexual dimorphism and at the same time by some hundreds
of kilometres! Therefore, we retain the two species K. simocephalus and K. cristarhynchus and have used this to reinforce our scepticism as to the usefulness of the Family
Stahleckeridae Cox.
It is possible that the Upper Beaufort, N'tawere and
Omigonde are, in fact, a group of horizons spanning the
Scythian-Anisian boundary and the facts then could be interpreted thus: that the basal Kannemeyeria stock is represented by K. simocephalus which is a long ranging
species, and that in the Cynognathus zone of the Beaufort
it gave rise to a separate lineage of Kannemeyeria-like
animals represented by the specimens from Zambia and
South West Africa. K. simocephalus is also known from the
Manda Formation (Cruickshank, 1965), the latest known
true Kannemeyeria, later even than those specimens under
discussion here.
Crompton and Hotton (MS.) have indicated that there
is a general shift in the orientation of the jaw adductor
muscles in Triassic anomodonts, leading from Kannemeyeria simocephalus (where the angle of insertion of these
muscles is acute to horizontal) to the late-Middle and
Upper Triassic anomodonts (Dinodontosaurus, Ischigualasfia, Stahleckeria and Placerias), where the angie of insertion is much nearer the vertical. This trend is reflected in a
shortening of the temporal openings, a deepening of the
caniniform processes, where the tusks are retained, a
broadening of the snout and reinforcing of the brain case
(Keyser, 1974).
At this stage, therefore, and in context of the overview
of the study as presented here, the following conclusions
can be maintained:
I. The genus Rechnisaurus Roy Chowdhury is indistinguishable from the genus Kannemeyeria Seeley.
2. The characters of R. cristarhynchus R. C. are seen in a
less elaborated fashion in K. simocephalus (Weit).
3. It is, therefore, possible that R. cristarhynchus R. C. rep-

resents an offshoot lineage from the K. simocephalus
(Weit) stock which evolved a shorter postorbital region,
heavier snout and deeper caniniform processes.
4. If the above is true, then the two families, Stahleckeridae Cox and Kannemeyeridae Cox, are not distinguishable and are hence no longer valid. All the large
Triassic anomodonts are then likely to be members of
the one family, viz. Kannemeyeridae Huene, which, in
turn, can be sub-divided into a number of subfamilies.
A similar exercise in discriminating between Cox's taxa
can be done on the other dicynodonts from South West
Africa, the genera Dolichuranus and Rhopalorhinus. The
former has a snout of Shansiodont type, and was classified
as such by Keyser (1973) in his original diagnosis of the
material. The latter has a snout of very robust appearance,
and the occiput was apparently very wide. From these
characters, Keyser placed the genus in the Stahleckeridae
Cox.
Subsequently a further collection of dicynodont material was made from the same localities which yielded the
types of these two genera (Keyser and Cruickshank, in
prep.). It is now clear that Dolichuranus and Rhopalorhinus
represent the extremes of a morphological series and that
the two genera are synonymous. The genus Dolichuranus
has page priority. This serves to point out that the criteria
defined by Cox for the Families Shansiodontidae and
Stahleckeridae are not discriminative and that the status
of these two families requires reassessment.
In the paper describing Dolichuranus, Keyser also
pointed out that the specimen Crozier (1970) had called
Kannemeyeria latirostris was in fact a member of the genus
Dolichuranus. At the same time that K. latirostris was described, Crozier noted that it was not typical of the genus
Kannemeyeria in several respects. However, the decision
was taken to include it in that taxon, even though it was
recognised as being slightly aberrant.
The reassessment of the genus Dolichuranus emphasises
two points of Triassic dicyondont taxonomy. One is to reinforce the idea of the over-all great similarity of the family as represented in the Triassic and concomitantly, the
extreme difficulty of applying Cox's criteria to effect objective taxonomic decisions.
A reassessment of Stahleckeria itself, based on the skull of
the mounted skeleton in the Palaeozoology Museum in
Tubingen, and a comparison of this specimen with skulls
of Ischigualastia in the Museum of the Instituto Lillo, Tucuman, shows that these two genera are suprisingly similar
(Figs. 20, 33, 34). The Stahleckeria skull has a much narrower snout than that normally illustrated (Camp, 1956,
Fig. 45) and possesses a low dorsal ridge running on to the
naso-frontal region.
The skull of Stahleckeria has much wider occipital
flanges than does Ischigualastia, and in the latter genus
there is no quadrate foramen and the reflected lamina of
the angular contacts the lateral condyle of the lower jaw
(Keyser, 1974). Apart from these facts, the differences between the two are hardly more than those used by Cox
(1965) and Cruickshank (1967) to demonstrate possible
sexual dimorphism in Dinodontosaurus and Tetragonias respectively. Both Stahleckeria and Ischigualastia are of
course tuskless and "large". We therefore believe that
there are insufficient grounds to separate them except at
generic level, and will use this information to link all the
large Late Triassic forms together as advanced Kannemeyeria descendants in a subfamily of their own (see
below).
Ischigualast.ia occurs in the Santa Maria and Ischigualas~o Formations (Barbarena, pers. comm.). Stahleckeria is
unique to the Santa Maria and no material has been reported since Von Huene's discoveries.
Therefore, we recognise two main colateral lines of descent ~i.thin the Tri~ssic dicynodonts, to which we assign
subfamilIaI status, VIZ. Kannemeyerinae and Dinodonto-

ORIGINS AND CLASSIFICATION OF TRIASSIC DICYNODONTS

saurinae, and a third representing the very large specialised Upper Triassic end-forms which could be descended
from either or both of the other subfamilies, to which we
a'pply the name Stahleckerinae. A fourth subfamily is included to accommodate some poorly known specimens of
the genus Jacheleria Bonaparte.
Thus the unifying characters of the larger Triassic
dicynodonts are as follows:
I. Large body size, with skulls concomitantly rarely less
than 25 cm overall. Typically they are 40 cm or more
and tusked, but exceptions exist.
2. The snout is always as long or longer than the postorbital region of the skull. The palatal region is elongated. The temporal fenestra may be very short (see 4
below).
3. The fenestra medio-palatinalis (interpterygoid space)
is always less than 60 per cent of the length of the internal nares and less than 8 per cent of the total basal
length of the skull. In late forms it lies outside the
choanal depression and may at all stages of evolution
have raised margins.
4. The interpterygoid bar becomes dorsally expanded in
association with its shortening (see 2 above).
5. Elements in the front part of the brain case become
fused.
6. The reflected lamina of the angular grows close to or
contacts the lateral condyle of the articular.

7. The quadrate foramen disappears in those forms with
firm contact of the reflected lamina and lateral condyle.
8. In some late specialised forms there is an anterior process of the quadrate which lies along the quadrate
ramus of the pterygoid.
9. The epipterygoid develops an anterior ramus which
has a dorsal process.
10. The intertemporal region is always narrower than the
interorbital region.
11. The postfrontals are no longer seen on the dorsal surface of the skull.
12. The ectopterygoid is severely reduced or absent altogether.
13. The interclavicle is short and "X" shaped.
14. In all cases, except one, the ulna has a separately ossified olecranon process.
All the basic characters (i.e. 1--6, 9-13) are seen in the
genus Kannemeyeria. The other characters we regard as
derived. Hence as Kannemeyeria is the oldest known true
Triassic dicynodont and the genus with which all other
forms are compared, we propose to use it to derive the
name for the principal family of Triassic dicynodonts in
much the same sense as did Von Huene in 1948.
Table III summarises the occurrence of the genera m
time and space.

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

IV. A REVISED CLASSIFICATION OF TRIASSIC DICYNODONTS

Order Therapsida
Suborder Anomodontia
Infraorder Dicynodontia
Family Kannemeyeridae
1. Subfamily Kannemeyerinae
Kannemeyeria simocephala

Kannemeyeria wiIsoni
Kannemeyeria argentinens is
Kannemeyeria chrystarhynchus
Uralokannemeyeria ~iuschkovi
Rabidosaurus cristatus
? Rhadiodromus klimovi
? R hinocerocephalus cisuralensis
? Sangausaurus edentatus
? Wadiasaurus indicus
2. Subfamily Dinodontosaurinae
Dinodontosaurus turpior
Dinodontosaurus tener
Dinodontosaurus platyceps
Dinodontosaurus brevirostris
S inokannemeyeria pearsoni
S inokannemeyeria yingchiaoensis
Parakannemeyeria dolichocephala
Parakannemeyeria youngi
Parakannemeyeria ninglVUensis
Dolichuranus primaevus
Dolichuranus latirostris
Dolichuranus etionensis
Shansiodon wangi
Shansiodon lVUhsiangensis
Tetragonias njalilus
Vinceria andina
Rhinodicynodon gracile
? Zambiasaurus submersus

97

Syn. Dicynodon simocephalus
D.icynodon lati/rons
Kannemeyeria proboscoides
Kannemeyeria erithrea
Sagecephalus pachyrhynchus
Syn. Kannameyeria vanhoepeni

Syn. Lystrosaurus klimovi

Syn. Dicynodon turpior
Dinodontosaurus oliveirai
Syn. Dicynodon tener
Syn. Chanaria platyceps

Syn. Rhopalorhinus
Syn. Dicynodon njalilus

TRANSACTIONS OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF SOUTH AFRICA

98

3. Subfamily Stahleckerinae

Stahleckeria potens
Ischigualastia jenseni
Placerias hesternus
Placerias gigas
Barysoma lenzii

Syn. Stahleckeria lenzii

4. Subfamily Jachelerinae

J acheleria colorata
Jacheleria platygnathus

Syn. Dinodontosaurus platygnathus

A. The Family Kannemeyeridae Huene, 1948

Revised diagnosis
Medium- to large-sized Triassic anomodonts with labial
fossae and small fenestrae medio-palatinales; long snouts
and pterygoid rami of epipterygoids with dorsal processes;
tusked or tuskless; narrow intertemporal region; much reduced postfrontals and ectopterygoids; reflected lamina of
angular approaches very close to, or contacts, lateral condyle of the articular; interclavicles short, "X"- or "V"shaped, with ventral peg; ulna with separately ossified
olecranon ulnae except in Kannemeyeria; descendants of
Dicynodontidae s.s. through a form like Odontocyc/ops or
some species of the genus Dicynodon.

1. Subfamily I Kannemeyerinae Lehman, 1961 Emend

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

Diagnosis
Large universally tusked forms with pronounced parietal crest; narrow pointed snout with well-developed
single median ridge on the premaxilla and nasals; nasals
have pronounced sculpture; no nasal bosses; postorbitals reach to, but do not overlap, the squamosals; perhaps descendants of a form like Dinanomodon.
(a) Genus Kannemeyeria Seeley, 1908 (Figs. 16-20).
Diagnosis: Skulls with zygomatic arches parallel or
sub-parallel; orbit large and dominates facial
region; precanine region short.

Figure 22

(i) Kannemeyeria simocephala (Weithofer) 1888 Type species.
Synonyms - Dicynodon simocephalus Weit,

1888.
Dicynodon latifrons Broom, 1898.
Kannemeyeria proboscoides Seeley, 1908.
Sagecephalus pachyrhynchus Jaekel, 1911.
Kannemeyeria erithrea Haughton,
1915.
(ii) Kannemeyeria wilsoni Broom, 1937.
Synonym -? Kannemeyeria vanhoepeni Camp
1956.
(iii) Kannemeyeria argentinensis Bonaparte, 1966.
(iv) Kannemeyeria cristarhynchus (Roy Chowdhury),
1970.
Synonym - Rechnisaurus cristarhynchus Roy
Chowdhury, 1970.
Diagnoses: Species (i)--(iii) are discussed by Cruickshank (1970, pp. 5~51). Species (iv) is discussed
above (pp. 93-96).
(b) Genus Uralokannemeyeria Danilov, 1971 (Fig. 22).
Diagnosis (after Danilov, 1971): A kannemeyerine
with broad, low parietal crest. (Otherwise indistinguishable from Kannameyeria and is probably the
same as Kannemeyeria cristarhynchus.)
(i) Uralokannemeyeria vjuschkovi Danilov, 1971.

Uralakannemeyeria skull in two views. Scale is 5 em.

ORIGINS AND CLASSIFICATION OF TRIASSIC DICYNODONTS

99

Figure 24

Rhinocerocepha/us skull in lateral view. Scale is 5 cm.
Figure 23

Rabidosaurus skull in lateral view. Scale is 5 cm.

(c) Genus Rabidosaurus Kalandadze, 1970 (Fig. 23).
Diagnosis: A kannemeyerine which differs from the
type genus only in its excessively developed
parietal crest. (It may be congeneric with Kanne-

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

meyeria.)
(i) Rabidosaurus cristatus Kalandadze, 1970.
(d) Kannemeyerinae incertae sedis.
(i) Rhadiodromus klimovi (Efremov), 1938.
Synonym - Lystrosaurus klimovi Efremov,
1938.
(ii) Rhinocerocephalus cisuralensis Vjuschkov, 1969
(Fig. 24).
(iii) ? Sanguasaurus edentatus Cox, 1969.
(iv) ? Wadiasaurus indicus Roy Chowdhury, 1970
(Fig. 25).

Diagnoses: The last two forms - (iii) and (iv) - are
tuskless, and although exhibiting other features in
common with Kannemeyeria, may form the basis of
a new subfamily. Rhinocerocephalus (ii) is also very
probably closely related to Kannemeyeria, but the
available figures and descriptions are inadequate
for a definite conclusion.
2. Subfamily II Dinodontosaurinae Subfam. Nov.

Diagnosis
Small to large dicynodonts, all prominently tusked;
parietal region never elevated; parietal processes of
postorbitals short, or very short, rarely reaching the
squamosals; nasal bosses present in some; wide square
snout with one or more low ridges on the snout; perhaps descendants of Daptocephalus.
(a) Genus Dinodontosaurus Romer, 1943 (Figs. 12-15).
Synonym - Chanaria Cox, 1968.

Figure 25

Wadiasaurus skull in two views. Scale is 5 cm.

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

100

TRANSACTIONS OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF SOUTH AFRICA

Diagnosis: Moderately large form with short postorbital region of the skull; snout rectangular in section with markedly blunt anterior margin; no nasal
bosses; tabular absent; ectopterygoid much reduced, lying on dorso-Iateral surface of pterygoid;
parietal process of postorbital very short, extending
barely to the level of the pineal foramen.
(i) Dinodontosaurus turpior (Huene), 1935 - Type
species.
Synonyms - Dicynodon turpior Huene, 1935.
Dinodontosaurus oliveirai Romer,
1943.
(ii) Dinodontosaurus tener (Huene), 1935.
Synonym - Dicynodon tener Huene, 1935.
(iii) Dinodontosaurus platyceps (Cox), 1968.
Synonym - Chanaria platyceps Cox, 1968.
(iv) Dinodontosaurus brevirostris Cox, 1968.
Diagnoses: Differences between these species are
pointed out in the main body of this contribution.
The species Dinodontosaurus platygnathus is transferred to the genus Jacheleria (see below).
(b) Genus Sinokannemeyeria Young, 1937 (Fig. 26).
Diagnosis: Moderately large skull with short postorbital region; blunt snout with low mid-nasal ridge
and small nasal bosses; anterior tip of premaxilla
hollow; very prominent caniniform processes;
roughened area on dorsal surface of skull; parietal
crest wide, flat-topped or grooved; postorbitals run
far round temporal openings towards squamosals;
preparietal may be absent; very long dentary symphysis; humerus and femur broad and flat.
(i) Sinokannemeyeria pearsoni Young, 1937 - Type
species.
(ii) Sinokannemeyeria yingchiaoensis Sun, 1963.
Diagnoses: Differences between these two species
are pointed out in the main body of this contribution.
(c) Genus Parakannemeyeria Sun, 1960 (Fig. 27)
Diagnosis: Large, narrow skull with arched nasal
region and very short postorbital region; dorsal surface of skull less rugose than in Sinokannemeyeria,

and nasal ridges and bosses are absent; blunt snout
with premaxillary excavation; caninifor~ pr~cesses
prominent; parietal crest narrower than In Smokannemeyeri; postorbitals shorter, pre parietal may. be
absent shorter dentary symphysis; longer forelImb
and ~ore slender propodials than in Sinokannemeyeria.
(i) Parakannemeyeria dolichocephala Sun, 1960 Type species.
Oi) Parakannemeyeria youngi Sun, 1963.
(iii) Parakannemeyeria ningwuensis Sun, 1963.
Diagnoses: Sinokannemeyeria and Parakannemeyeria are
very similar and may prove to be congeneric when a
larger range of morphological variations are known.
The former genus is apparently from a lower horizon in
the succession than the latter (Zones I and II, as opposed to Zones IV and V of the Er-ma-ying Formation).
(d) Genus Dolichuranus Keyser, 1973 (Fig. 28)
Synonym - Rhopalorhinus Keyser, 1973-.
Diagnosis: Medium-sized skull with moderately
blunt snout and nasal bosses variably developed; indistinct mid-nasal ridge; preorbital and postorbital
regions sub-equal in length; caniniform processes
only moderately developed; premaxillary excavations variably developed; premaxilla reaches to
level of orbits dorsally; postorbitals reach only to
the back of the temporal openings; roughened area
on skull extends only over nasal bosses; preparietal
always present; very short mandibular symphysis.
(i) Dolichuranus primaevus Keyser, 1973 - Type
species.
(ii) Dolichuranus latirostris (Crozier), 1970.
Synonym - Kannemeyeria latirostris.
(iii) Dolichuranus etionensis (Keyser), 1973.
Synonym - Rhopalorhinus etionensis Keyser,
1973.
Diagnoses: Differences between these species are
pointed out in the main body of this contribution.

Figure 26

Sinokannemeyeria skull in two views. Scale is 5 em.

ORIGINS AND CLASSIFICATION OF TRIASSIC DICYNODONTS

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

Figure 27
Parakannameyeria skull in two views. Scale is 5 em.

Figure 28
Dolichuranus skull in two views. Scale is 5 em.

IO!

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

102

TRANSACTIONS OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF SOUTH AFRICA

(e) Genus Shamiodon Yeh, 1973 (Fig. 29).
Diagnosis: Skull small, preorbital and postorbital
regions equal in length; snout blunt; nasal ridges
and bosses present; caniniform processes moderately developed; femur with a very mammalian-like
caput.
(i) Shansiodon wangi Yeh, 1959 - Type species.
(ii) Shansiodon wuhsiangensis Yeh, 1959.
Diagnoses: Differences between these two species
are pointed out in the main body of this contribution.
(f) Genus Tetragonias Cruickshank, 1967 (Fig. 30).
Diagnosis: Small, square skull; preorbital and postorbital regions equal in length; snout markedly
square, mid-nasal ridge ends in frontal boss; nasal
bosses end in nasal overhangs; postorbitals withdrawn from squamosals; males with cylindrical caniniform processes, more triangular in cross section
in females.
(i) Tetragonias njalilus (Huene), 1942.
Synonym - Dicynodon njalilus.
(g) Genus Vinceria Bonaparte, 1967 (Fig. 31).
Diagnosis: Small, square skull; snout not very blunt;
pre orbital and postorbital regions equal in length;
maxillaries expanded around canines; postorbitals
approach close to squamosals. (Shamiodon, Tetragonias and Vinceria are probably very closely related. The type specimens should be brought together for close comparison. We believe that they
may prove to be congeneric.)
(i) Vinceria andina Bonaparte, 1967.
(h) Genus Rhinodicynodon Kalandadze, 1970 (Fig. 32).
Diagnosis: (From illustrations only.) Very small
skull, rectangular in dorsal aspect, with no midnasal ridge, but very prominent nasal bosses; postorbitals very short; caniniform processes enlarged
and cylindrical.
(i) Rhinodicynodon gracile Kalandadze, 1970.

(i)

Dinodontosauridae incertae sedis.
(i) Zambiasaurus submersus Cox, 1969.
.
Diagnosis: This taxon was established on some Immature skull fragments which show it to be tusk less,
but with a blunt snout and low, broad parietal crest;
short postorbitals and no preparietal or mid-nasal
ridge. Its final placing will depend on the recovery
of better material.
3. Subfamily HI Stahleckerinae non sensu Lehman, 1961
Diagnosis
Large skulls of advanced morphology and of Upper
Triassic age; tuskless, or with reduced tusks and small
caniniform processes; usually a single low ridge on
snout, which may be pointed, though less so than in
Kannemeyeria; parietal crest variably developed; postorbital processes short; preparietal may be absent; as
far as our knowledge stands at present, they could be
either kannemeyerine or dinodontosaurine descendants.
(a) Genus Stahleckeria Huene, 1935 (Figs. 20, 33).
Diagnosis: Very large square skull with very short
temporal fenestrae; no preparietal; no tusks; small
caniniform processes; snout not markedly blunt;
low mid-nasal ridge; reflected lamina of angular approaches lateral articular condyle very closely;
postorbital processes only moderately short.
(i) Stahleckeria potens Huene, 1935.
(b) Genus Ischigualastia Cox, 1962 (Fig. 34).
Diagnosis: Large tuskless skull with slightly raised,
broad parietal crest; substantial mid-nasal ridge,
narrow rounded snout; postorbitals well separated
from squamosals; occiput semi-cirular in outline;
tabulars probably absent; quadrate foramen absent;
reflected lamina of angular contacts lateral condyle
of articular; acromial process apparently absent
from scapula; coracoid foramen on dorsal edge of
precoracoid; femur with markedly offset caput.
(i) Ischigualastia jenseni Cox, 1962.

Figure 29
Shansiodon skull in two views. Scale is 5 em.

ORIGINS AN D CLASSIFICATION 0 F TRIASSIC DICYNO DONTS

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

Tetragonias skull In
.Figure
30 . Seal e .IS 5 em.
two views

Vinceria skull'In Figure
31 s. Seale is 5 em.
two view

103

104

TRANSACTIONS OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF SOUTH AFRICA

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

Figure 32
Rhinodicynodon skull in two views. Scale is 5 em.

Figure 33
Stahleckeria skull in two views. Scale is 5 em.

ORIGINS AND CLASSIFICATION OF TRIASSIC DICYNODONTS

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

Figure 34
Ischigualastia skull in two views. Scale is 5 em.

Figure 35
Placerias skull in two views. Scale is 5 em.

\05

TRANSACTIONS OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF SOUTH AFRICA

106

(c) Genus Placerias Lucas, 1904 (Fig. 35).
Diagnosis: Large skull with sharp snout running into
nasals of inverted "V" shape in cross section;
prominent blade-like caniniform processes containing very reduced canines; parietal crest moderately
high and convex dorsally; parietal processes of
postorbitals short, reaching only to the level of the
pineal foramen.
(i) Placerias hesternus Lucas, 1904 - Type species.
(ii) Placerias gigas Camp and Welles, 1956.
Diagnosis: Differences between these two species
are pointed out in the main body of this contribution.
(d) Genus Barysoma Cox, 1965.
Diagnosis: Large skull, incompletely known, but believed to be closely related to Ischigualastia; occiput
semi-circular in outline with similar parietal crest;
acromial process present on scapula; limb bones
much larger than in Ischigualastia.
(i) Barysoma lenzii (Romer and Price), 1944.
Synonym - Stahleckeria lenzii Romer and
Price, 1944.
4. Subfamily IV Jachelerinae Keyser, 1974

Figure 36
Jache/eria skull in lateral view. Scale is 5 cm.

Ius?) crassus Broom (Keyser, 1974), which could indicate that these rare forms may represent a separate lineage of familial status, descended from the
Cryptodontia of the Beaufort Group.

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

Diagnosis
Large forms with lower jaw symphysis having a very
long flat profile; quadrate has a pterygoid process; not
yet well enough known for any further diagnostic observations.
(a) Genus lacheleria Bonaparte, 1971 (Fig. 36).
Diagnosis: Posterior region of temporal arches
higher than the very long narrow parietal bar which
does not form a high crest; temporal arches very
slender.
(i) 1 acheleria colorata Bonaparte, 1971.
(ii) lacheleria platygnathus (Cox), 1968.
Synonym - Dinodontosaurus platygnathus
Cox, 1968.
Diagnoses: Differences between these two species
are pointed out in the main body of this contribution. This poorly known group is erected to accommodated Triassic dicynodonts with a pronounced pterygoid process of the quadrate. Such a
process is also found in Platycyc!ops (Rhachiocepha-

B. Triassic Dicynodontia I ncertae Sedis
(a) Genus Elephantosaurus Vjuschkov, 1969.
. Diagnosis: Large skull represented by a fragment of
the interorbital region, distinguishable from all Kannemeyerids by the exceptional thickness of the skull
bones; believed by Vjuschkov to be closest to Stahleck-

eria.
(i) Elephantosaurus jachimovitschi Vjuschkov, 1968.

C. Other Dicynodontia of Triassic Age
(a) Genus Lystrosaurus Cope, 1870 (Fig. 37).
Diagnosis: Smaller, earlier, evidently amphibious
form, highly specialised with a ventrally prolonged
snout inclined virtually at right angles to the skull; terminal phalanges broadly flattened; ilia peculiarly
notched. A total of 32 species had thus far been des-

Figure 37

Lystrosaurus skull in two views. Scale is 5 cm.

ORIGINS AND CLASSIFICATION OF TRIASSIC DICYNODONTS

107

Figure 38

Myosaurus skull in two views. Scale is 5 cm.
cribed under this genus (two under the junior synonym

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

Prolystrosaurus), some species having originally been
introduced under preoccupied or superfluous generic
names like Ptychognathus, Ptychosiagum and Mochlorhinus. Five of these 32 species occur outside the
Karoo basin of South Africa in South and East Asia.
After earlier attempts at synonymising some of the 27
South African species, C1uver (1971) succeeded in reducing them to nine. Possibly these nine species can be
reduced even further to only four, bearing growth
stages and sexual dimorphism in mind. The nine
species recognised by C1uver could then possibly be
synonymised as follows (A. S. Brink, pers. comm.):
(i) Lystrosaurus curvatus (Owen), 1876.
Synonyms - Lystrosaurus bothai Broom, 1941.
Lystrosaurus oviceps Haughton, 1915.
Lystrosaurus rubidgei Broom, 1940.
(ii) Lystrosaurus declivis (Owen), 1860.
(iii) Lystrosaurus murrayi (Huxley), 1895.
(iv) Lystrosaurus platyceps (Seeley), 1898.
Synonyms - Lystrosaurus maccaigi (Seeley), 1898.
Lystrosaurus putterilli (Van Hoepen),
1915.
To these can be added the Asian species:
(v) Lystrosaurus broomi Young, 1939.
(vi) Lystrosaurus hedini Young, 1935.
(vii) Lystrosaurus incicivum (Repelin), 1932.
(viii) Lystrosaurus orientalis (Huxley), 1865.
(ix) Lystrosaurus weidenreichi Young, 1939.
Lystrosaurus and Geikiea belong to the Family
Lystrosauridae Romer, 1966.
(b) Gen us Myosaurus Haughton, 1917.
Diagnosis: Very small form known from one locality in
the South African Lystrosaurus zone.
(i) Myosaurus gracilis Haughton, 1917 (Fig. 38).
Myosaurus (along with some other earlier forms) belongs to the Family Myosauridae Kitching, 1977.
(c) Genus Kombuisia Hotton, 1974.
Diagnosis: A small form from the Cynognathus zone
(uppermost Scythian) of South Africa.
(i) Kombuisia frerensis Hotton, 1974 (Fig. 39).
Kombuisia is a member of the family Dicynodontia
Romer, 1966.

Figure 39

Kombuisia skull in two views. Scale is 5 cm.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are greatly indebted to the following for access to
specimens and for critically reading various drafts of this contribution: Dr S. H. Haughton, Mr P. 1. Rossouw, Dr 1. W.
Kitching and Dr A. S. Brink.
Mrs Enid Cruickshank typed the manuscript and the illustrations were prepared at the Geological Survey of South
Africa by Dr A. S. Brink, Mrs P. Prowse and Mrs R. Fregona.
We are also grateful to several students of the University of
the Witwatersrand who provided technical assistance: Miss
Sara Barnes, Miss Julie Bunt and Mr Glynn Balkwill.

Reproduced by Sabinet Gateway under licence granted by the Publisher (dated 2010)

108

TRANSACTIONS OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF SOUTH AFRICA

REFERENCES
Anderson, H. M., and Anderson, J. M. (1970). A prelil!linary.review of the biostratigraphy of the Uppermost Permian, Tnassic and Lowermost Jurassic of Gondwanaland. Palaeont. afr ..
13, (supplement), 1-22.
.
Bonaparte, J. F. (1966). Una nueva "fau~a" Triasi.ca de .Argentlna
(Therapsida: Cynodontia Dicynodontla); conslderaclOnes filogeneticas. Ameghiniana. 4, 243-296.
- - - - (1967). Dos nuevas "faunas" de reptiles Triassico~ de
Argentina. Proceedings LU.G.S. First Gondwana SymposIUm,
Mar del Plata, UNESCO. Amsterdam, 283-302.
.
.
- - - - (1971). Annotated check list ~f the South Amencan Tnassic Tetrapods, 665~82. Proceedings I.U.G.S. 2~d Gondwana Symposium, South Africa. C.S.I.R., Pretona, S. H.
Haughton, Ed.
Boonstra, L. D. (1938). Report on some Karroo reptiles from the
Luangwa Valley, Northern Rhodesia. Q. JI. geol. Soc. Lond..
94, 371-384.
Broom, R. (1898). On two new species of dicynodonts. Ann. S. Afr.
Mus .. 1, 452-459.
- - - - (1937). A further contribution to our knowledge of the
fossil reptiles of the Karroo. Proc. zool. Soc. Lond.. (B) 1937,
299-318.
- - - - (1938). On two new anomodont genera. Ann. Transv.
Mus .. 19,247.
Camp, C. L. (1956). Triassic dicynodont reptiles, Part II. Triassic
dicynodonts compared. Mem. Univ. Calif.. 13, 305-34\.
- - - - , and Welles, S. P. (1956). Triassic dicynodont reptiles,
Part I. The North American genus Placerias. Mem. Univ. Calif..
13, 255-304.
Chowdhury, T. R. (1970). The new dicynodonts from the Triassic
Verrapalli Formation of Central India. Palaeontology. 13,
132-144.
CIuver, M. A. (1971). The cranial morphology of the dicynodont
genus Lystrosaurus. Ann. S. Afr. Mus .. 56, 155-274.
- - - - (1974). The cranial morphology of the Lower Triassic
dicynodont Myosaurus gracilis. Ann. S. Afr. Mus .. 66, 35-54.
Cope, E. D. (1870). On the skull of dicynodont Reptilia. Lystrosaurus frontosus from Cape Colony. Proc. Am. phil. Soc.. 11,
419.
.
Cox, C. B. (1965). New Triassic dicynodonts from South Amenca,
their origins and relationships. Phil. Trans. roy. Soc. Lond.. (B)
248, 457-516.
- - - - (1962). (See Romer and Cox, 1962.)
- - - - (1968). The Chafiares (Argentina) Triassic fauna. IV.
The dicynodont fauna. Breviora. 205, 1-27.
..,
- - - - (1969). Two new dicynodonts from the Tnasslc N tawere formation, Zambia. Bull. Brit. Mus. nat. Hist. (Geol.). 17,
255-294.
Crompton, A. W., and Hotton, N. (1967). F~nctional morphol?~y
of the masticatory apparatus of two dlcynodonts (Reptilia,
Theraspida). Postil/a. 109, 1-5\.
- - - - , and - - - - (MS). A functional study of the masticatory apparatus of dicynodonts (published in part as Crompton
and Hotton, 1967).
Crozier, E. A. (1970). Preliminary report on two Triassic dicynodonts from Zambia. Palaeont. afr.. 13, 39-45.
Cruickshank, A. R. I. (1964). The origin of the Triassic dicynodonts (Reptilia: Synapsida). Nature. Lond.. 201, 733. .
- - - - (l96~). On a specimen of the Anomodont reptile Kannemeyeria lati/rons (Broom) from the Manda FormatIOn of Tanganyika Tanzania. Proc. Linn. Soc. Lond.. 176, 149-157.
- - - - (1967). A new dicynodont genus from the Manda Formation of Tanzania (Tanganyika). J. Zoo/. Lond.. 153,
163-208.
.
.
- - - - (1968). A comparison of the palates of Permian and Tnassic dicynodonts. Palaeont. afr.. 11, 23-31.
- - - - (1970). The taxonomy of the anomodont genus Kannemeyeria Seeley 1908. Palaeont. afr.. 13,47-55.
- - - - (1972). A note on the genus Proplacerias Cruickshank
1970. Palaeont. afr.. 14, 17.
.
.
..
.
- - - - (1978). Feeding adaptatIOns In Tnasslc dlcynodonts.
Palaeont. aJr.. 21, 121-132.
Danilov, A. I. (1971). A new dicynodont from the Middle Triassic
of Southern Osuralia. Palaeont. zhur.. 1971. 132-135.
Drysdal\, A. R., and Kitching, J. W. (1963). A re-examination of
the Karroo succession and fossil localities of part of the Upper
Luangwa Valley. Mem. geol. Surv. N. Rhod.. I, 1~2.
Efremov, J. A. (1938). The recovery of a Triassic anomodont in
the Orenburg Province. Dokl. Akad. Nauk. SSSR. (n.s.), 20,
227-229.
- - - - (1940). Preliminary description of the new Permian and
Triassic Tetrapoda from USSR. Trudy palaeont. Inst.. 10,
1-139.
- - - - (1951). On the structure of the knee joint in the higher
Dicynodontidae. Dokl. Akad. Nauk. SSSR. (n.s.), 77, 483-485
(in Russian).
Ewer, R. F. (1961). The anatomy of the Anomodont DaptocephaIus leoniceps (Owen). Proc. zool. Soc. Lond., 136, 375-402.

Haughton, S. H. (1915). On a skull of the genus Kannemeyeria.
Ann S Afr. MIL~ .. 12,91-97.
.
.
f R tT
. . dB' k A S (1954). Bibliographical list 0
- - - - , an
nn, . .
I
ifi 2 I 187 ep Iia
from the Karroo Beds of Africa. Pa aeon~. ~ r.. , - .' f m
Hotton, N. (1974). A new dicynodont (Rep~tlla: TherasPldljia) ';~s
Cynognathus zone deposits of South Afnca. Ann. S. A r.
..
64, 157-165.
.
Jaekel O. (1911). Die Wirbeltiere. Berlin.
. .
'd
Kalandadze, N. H. (1970). The new. Tnasslc K~nnemeyen s2
South Ural region, ?1-~7. In: ~atenals of evolutIOn of Terres
trial Vertebrates. SCientific Publishers, Moscow.
.
Keyser, A. W. (1969). A re-evaulation of the systemati~s (and ~f)
phology of certain Anomodont therasplda. Ph. D. thesIs unpu .,
Univ. Witwatersrand..
f
S th
____ (1973). A new TriassIc vertebrate fauna rom ou
West Africa. Palaeont. afr .. 16, 1-15. .
..,
.
____ (1974). Evolutionary trends In Tnasslc DlcynodontIa.
Palaeont. afr.. 17, 57~8.
.
..
I J'k
Kitching, J. W. (1963). The fossil localities and mam":1 a - I e reptiles of the Upper Luanga Valley, Northern Rhodesia. S. Afr. J.
Sci.. 59, 259-264.
.
. S th
- - - - (1971). A short review of the Beaufort zoning In ou
Africa, 309-312. Proceedings l.u.q.S. 2nd Gondwana Symposium, South Africa. C.S.I.R., Pretona. S. H. Haughton, Ed.
- - - - (1977). The distr.ibution ?f the Karroo vertebra~e fauna.
Mem. 1, Bernard Price Institute for Palaeontological Research, Univ. Witwatersrand, Johannesburg.
.
Lehman, J.-P. (1961). Dicynodontia, 287-351. I,,;: Plv~teau, J.,
Ed., Traite de Paleontologie, VI(i). Masson et Oe, ~ans.
Lucas, F. A. (1904). A new batrachian and a new reptile from the
Trias of Arizona. Proc. U.S. nat. Mus .. 27, 193-195.
.
Owen, R. (1876). Descriptive and illustrated catalogu~ .of the fosstl
reptilia of South Africa in t~e Collection of the Bfltish Museum.
British Museum (Natural History), London.
.
Pearson, H. S. (1924). The skull of the dicynodont reptile Kanne.
meyeria Proc. zool. Soc. Lond.. 1924, 783-826.
Romer, A.' S. (1943). Recent mounts .of fossil reptiles and amphibians in the Museum of Comparative Zoology. Bull. Mus. compo
Zool. Harv.. 42,331-338.
.
- - - - (1956). Osteology of the Reptiles. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.
.
- - - - (1966). Vertebrate Paleontology. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago. Third edition.
- - - - , and Cox, C. B. (1962). The fossilifen:)U~ Triassic ~e
posits of Ischigualasto, Argentina, and a preliminary descnption of Ischigualastia. a new genus of dlcynodont. Brevofla.
156, 1-9.
.
.
- - - - , and Price, L. I. (1944). Stahleckeria lenzii. a giant Tnassic Brazilian dicynodont. Bull. Mus. compo Zool. Harv.. 93,
465-491.
Seeley, H. G. (1908). On a fossil reptile with a trunk from Upper
Karroo rocks of Cape Colony. Rep. Brit. Assoc. Dublin, 78,
713.
Sun, A.-L. (1960). On a new genus of Kannemeyerids from Ningwu,
Shansi. Vertebr. palasiat. 4, 67-80.
- - - - (1963). The Chinese Kannemeyerids. Palaeont. sinica,
147, (N. Ser. 17), 73-109.
Toerien, M. J. (1953). The evolution of the palate in South African Anomodontia and its classificatory significance. Palaeont.
afr .. 1, 49-115.
Van Hoepen, E. C. N. (1934). Oor die indeling van die Dicynodontidae na aanleiding van nuwe vorme. Paleont. Navors. nas.
Mus. Bloemfontein. 2, 67-101. .
. .
Vjuschev, V. R. (1969). New dlcynodonts from the Tnasslc of
Southern Cisuralia. Palaeont. Zh.. 2, 237-242.
Von Huene, F. (1935-1942). Die fossilen Reptilien des Siidamerikanischen Gondwanalandes an der Zeitenwende. Tlibingen.
- - - - (1942). Die Anomodontia der Ruhuhu-Gebeites in der
Tlibinger Sammlung. Palaeontographica (A), 94, 155-184.
- - - - (1948). Short review of the lower tetrapods. R. Broom
Commemorative volume. Spec. PubI. roy. Soc. S. Afr., 65-105
Weithofer, A. (1888). Uber einen neuen Dicynodonten (Dicynodon simocephalus) aus der Karrooformation, Slidafrika. Annln.
naturh. Mus. Wien . 3, I~.
Yeh, H. K. (1959). New dicynodont from Sinokannemeyeria-fauna
from Shansi. Vertebr. palasiat.. 3, 187-204.
Young, C. C. (1937). On the Triassic dicynodonts from Shansi.
Bull. geol. Soc. China. 17, 393-411.

A. W. Keyser,
Geological Survey,
P.B. X112,
0001 Pretoria.
A. R. I. Cruickshank,
Bernard Price Institute for Palaeontological Research,
University of the Witwatersrand,
2001 Johannesburg.
Accepted for publication on 30.4.1979.

