Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology

ISSN: 0272-4634 (Print) 1937-2809 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ujvp20

A redescription of the Triassic kannemeyeriiform
dicynodont Sangusaurus (Therapsida,
Anomodontia), with an analysis of its feeding
system
Kenneth D. Angielczyk, P. John Hancox & Ali Nabavizadeh
To cite this article: Kenneth D. Angielczyk, P. John Hancox & Ali Nabavizadeh (2017) A
redescription of the Triassic kannemeyeriiform dicynodont Sangusaurus (Therapsida,
Anomodontia), with an analysis of its feeding system, Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology,
37:sup1, 189-227, DOI: 10.1080/02724634.2017.1395885
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/02724634.2017.1395885

View supplementary material

Published online: 27 Mar 2018.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 545

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 6 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ujvp20

Society of Vertebrate Paleontology Memoir 17
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology
Volume 37, Supplement to Number 6: 189–227
Ó 2017 by the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology

A REDESCRIPTION OF THE TRIASSIC KANNEMEYERIIFORM DICYNODONT
SANGUSAURUS (THERAPSIDA, ANOMODONTIA), WITH AN ANALYSIS OF ITS FEEDING
SYSTEM
KENNETH D. ANGIELCZYK,*,1,2 P. JOHN HANCOX,2 and ALI NABAVIZADEH3
Integrative Research Center, Field Museum of Natural History, 1400 South Lake Shore Drive, Chicago, Illinois 60605, U.S.A.,
kangielczyk@fieldmuseum.org;
2
Evolutionary Studies Institute, University of the Witwatersrand, P.O. Wits 2050, Johannesburg, South Africa,
jhancox@cciconline.com;
3
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cooper Medical School of Rowan University, 401 South Broadway, Camden, New Jersey
08103, U.S.A., alinabav@gmail.com
1

ABSTRACT—The Triassic dicynodont Sangusaurus is poorly known because the holotype of the first species to be described
(S. edentatus from Zambia) is fragmentary, and the description of the second species (S. parringtonii from Tanzania) is
extremely brief. Nevertheless, the genus has played a role in Triassic biostratigraphy by linking the Ntawere Formation and
the Manda Beds. Here, we redescribe Sangusaurus, including a new, nearly complete skull from Tanzania. The incomplete
holotype of S. edentatus results in few characters diagnosing the genus. The skull of S. parringtonii, however, is highly
autapomorphic. The snout is telescoped, with only a thin strip of frontals separating the nasals and the parietals. The external
surfaces of the premaxilla, the maxillae, the nasals, and the prefrontals are extremely rugose; a sharp median crest extends
from the premaxilla to the frontals, terminating in a thickened boss. The occiput is broader than the skull is long, and the
adductor fossa on the squamosal is nearly vertical. Our phylogenetic analysis shows that Sangusaurus is not a kannemeyeriid
but instead is a stahleckeriid. The feeding system of Sangusaurus emphasizes an orthal jaw motion. The articular surfaces of
the jaw joint form a single posteroventrally sloping surface; translating the quadrate and the articular results in a primarily
orthal movement of the jaw symphysis. The internal and external jaw adductors provide a strong, dorsally-directed
component to the power stroke. Adductor mechanical advantage is similar to Stahleckeria, but Sangusaurus likely had a
stronger transverse component of jaw movement because of the very lateral placement of M. adductor mandibulae externus
lateralis.
SUPPLEMENTAL DATA—Supplemental materials are available for this article for free at www.tandfonline.com/UJVP
Citation for this article: Angielczyk, K. D., P. J. Hancox, and A. Nabavizadeh. 2018. A redescription of the Triassic
kannemeyeriiform dicynodont Sangusaurus (Therapsida, Anomodontia), with an analysis of its feeding system; pp. 189–227
in C. A. Sidor and S. J. Nesbitt (eds.), Vertebrate and Climatic Evolution in the Triassic Rift Basins of Tanzania and Zambia.
Society of Vertebrate Paleontology Memoir 17. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 37(6, Supplement).

INTRODUCTION
Sangusaurus is one of the most enigmatic Triassic dicynodonts.
Cox (1969) named the type species, S. edentatus, based on a
series of skull fragments presumed to represent a single individual that were collected in the Ntawere Formation of Zambia by
the 1963 British Museum (Natural History)–University of London Joint Palaeontological Expedition to Northern Rhodesia
and Tanganyika. No additional material from Zambia or elsewhere has been referred to S. edentatus since its original description (Angielczyk et al., 2014). Cruickshank (1986a) named a
second species of Sangusaurus, S. parringtonii, based on a more
complete skull and partial jaw collected in the Manda Beds (K8
of Stockley, 1932; now the Lifua Member of the Manda Beds;
see Markwort, 1991) of the Ruhuhu Basin, Tanzania, by Ernst
Nowack during his work there in the late 1930s (Nowack, 1937).
Although Cruickshank (1986a) provided a reconstruction of the
skull of S. parringtonii, his description was extremely brief and
included little information about the species’ anatomy beyond
the characters that differentiated it from S. edentatus. An additional specimen of S. parringtonii collected by Nowack was subsequently discovered in the Ruhuhu Basin collection of the

*Corresponding author.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in the article can be found
online at www.tandfonline.com/ujvp.

Published online 27 Mar 2018

University of Cambridge Museum of Zoology, and a third specimen was collected in Tanzania in 2007 by a team including one
of us (K.D.A.), but neither specimen has been formally
described.
Given the small amount of information about Sangusaurus
available in the literature, its phylogenetic relationships have
remained unclear. Cox (1965) divided Triassic dicynodonts into
four families (Lystrosauridae, Shansiodontidae, Kannemeyeriidae, and Stahleckeriidae), and within this framework he considered Sangusaurus to be a kannemeyeriid, positing a particularly
close relationship to Ischigualastia (Cox, 1969). Cruickshank
(1986a) agreed with the kannemeyeriid status of Sangusaurus
when he described S. parringtonii, and his reconstruction of the
specimen reflects this idea in bearing a strong resemblance to
Kannemeyeria lophorhinus (e.g., compare Cruickshank, 1986a:
fig. 1 with Renaut, 2000:fig. 70). Some subsequent workers followed the assignment of Sangusaurus to Kannemeyeriidae (RoyChowdhury, 1970; Keyser and Cruickshank, 1979; Keyser and
Brink in Brink, 1982; Cox, 1991, 1998), but Cooper (1980) considered Sangusaurus to be more closely related to Stahleckeria
than Kannemeyeria (i.e., a member of his Stahleckeriinae). Cox
and Li (1983), King (1988), and Bandyopadhyay (1989) listed it
as incertae sedis within the main clade of Triassic dicynodonts
(i.e., Kannemeyeriinae of King, 1988; Kannemeyeriiformes of
Maisch, 2001). More recently, Sangusaurus has been included in
several phylogenetic analyses (Maisch, 2001; Surkov and Benton,
2004; Kammerer et al., 2011, 2013, 2015a; Castaninha et al.,

190

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

2013; Angielczyk and Cox, 2015; Cox and Angielczyk, 2015;
Angielczyk et al., 2016; Boos et al., 2016). Maisch (2001) recovered it as the sister taxon of Rechnisaurus within his
Dinodontosauridae, which also included Dinodontosaurus, Parakannemeyeria, Sinokannemeyeria, and Rhadiodromus. Surkov
and Benton’s (2004) analysis also suggested a close relationship
to Rechnisaurus but reflected the more traditional position of
Sangusaurus within Kannemeyeriiformes, with it being reconstructed as the sister taxon of Kannemeyeria C Rechnisaurus. In
contrast, Sangusaurus falls within Stahleckeriidae in the analyses
stemming from modifications of Kammerer et al.’s (2011) data
set (Castaninha et al., 2013; Kammerer et al., 2013, 2015a;
Angielczyk and Cox, 2015; Cox and Angielczyk, 2015; Angielczyk et al., 2016; Boos et al., 2016), usually as the sister taxon of
Eubrachiosaurus.
Despite being poorly known, Sangusaurus has played a role in
Middle Triassic tetrapod biostratigraphy. The presence of Sangusaurus and Zambiasaurus in the upper Ntawere Formation and
Kannemeyeria lophorhinus and ‘K.’ latirostris in the lower Ntawere of the Luangwa Basin, Zambia, has been used to support
the hypothesis that these stratigraphic levels sample temporally
distinct faunal assemblages (e.g., Cox, 1969, 1991; Cruickshank,
1986a; Battail, 1993; Fr€
obisch, 2009; Angielczyk et al., 2014).
The occurrence of Sangusaurus in the Manda Beds of Tanzania
also provides a direct correlation between the upper Ntawere
and the Lifua Member of the Manda Beds (Cruickshank, 1986a;
Cox, 1991; Battail, 1993; Angielczyk et al., 2014). Because

Sangusaurus is known only from the Luangwa and Ruhuhu
basins, it generally has not been used in long-distance biostratigraphic correlations, although Jain and Roy-Chowdhury (1987)
and Jain (1996) used comparisons of Sangusaurus and Wadiasaurus in their argument for a correlation between the Yerrapalli
Formation of India and the Manda Beds.
Here, we present a detailed redescription of Sangusaurus
(Fig. 1), with special attention paid to the relatively complete
material of S. parringtonii from Tanzania that has not been considered previously. These specimens show that the highly autapomorphic skull morphology of Sangusaurus was not fully
appreciated by previous researchers. We also investigate the
implications of this unusual morphology for the function of its
feeding system and reassess the phylogenetic relationships of the
genus.
Institutional Abbreviations—BP, Evolutionary Studies Institute, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South
Africa; GPIT, Pal€
aontologische Sammlung, Eberhard Karls Universit€
at T€
ubingen, T€
ubingen, Germany; NHCC, National Heritage Conservation Commission, Lusaka, Zambia; NHMUK,
Natural History Museum, London, U.K.; NMT, National
Museum of Tanzania, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania; PIN, Paleontological Institute, Moscow, Russia; SAM, Iziko Museums of
South Africa, Cape Town, South Africa; UCMP, University of
California Museum of Paleontology, Berkeley, California,
U.S.A.; UMZC, University Museum of Zoology, Cambridge,
U.K.; ZLS, Livingstone Museum, Livingstone, Zambia.

FIGURE 1. The archosaur Nundasuchus songeaensis (left) attacks Sangusaurus parringtonii (right).

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus
SYSTEMATIC PALEONTOLOGY
THERAPSIDA Broom, 1905
ANOMODONTIA Owen, 1860
DICYNODONTIA Owen, 1860
KANNEMEYERIIFORMES Maisch, 2001
STAHLECKERIIDAE (Lehman, 1961)
SANGUSAURUS Cox, 1969
Type Species—Sangusaurus edentatus Cox, 1969.
Revised Diagnosis—A large kannemeyeriiform dicynodont
(basal skull length about 330 mm) characterized by the following
unique combination of character states: longitudinal median
ridge on anterior surface of premaxilla; caniniform tusks absent;
low boss on skull roof posterior to the pineal foramen; parietals
exposed on dorsal surface of intertemporal bar; intertemporal
bar concave dorsally in cross-section; and interparietal makes
large contribution to posterior portion of intertemporal bar. Can
be differentiated from Dinodontosaurus, Dolichuranus,
Kannemeyeria, Moghreberia, Parakannemeyeria, Placerias, Rabidosaurus, Rechnisaurus, Rhadiodromus, Rhinodicynodon,
Shaanbeikannemeyeria, Shansiodon, Sinokannemeyeria, Tetragonias, Uralokannemeyeria, Vinceria, and Xiyukannemeyeria by
the absence of caniniform tusks. Can be differentiated from
Ischigualastia and Jachaleria by wider exposure of parietals on
dorsal surface of intertemporal bar, presence of a boss posterior
to the pineal foramen, and postorbitals that extend posteriorly
for the entire length of the intertemporal bar. Can be differentiated from Angonisaurus, Stahleckeria, Wadiasaurus, and Zambiasaurus by the presence of a boss posterior to the pineal
foramen. Sangusaurus likely can differentiated from Eubrachiosaurus by the expanded, ventrally facing capitulum of the

FIGURE 2. Geographic positions of localities that have produced specimens of Sangusaurus. Locality 1 is the type locality of S.
edentatus in the upper Luangwa Basin. Locality 2 is the type locality of S. parringtonii in
the Ngaka sub-basin of the Ruhuhu Basin.
The referred specimens UMZC T1225 and
UMZC T1340 were found within 100 m of
this locality. Locality 3 is in the KetewakaMchuchuma sub-basin of the Ruhuhu Basin
and produced NMT RB42, a referred specimen of S. parringtonii.

191

humerus, and the straight ventral edge of the anterior iliac process, but these elements are only known in S. parringtonii.
Remarks—The extremely fragmentary nature of the only
specimen of Sangusaurus edentatus makes it uncertain whether
distinctive features of the skull seen in specimens of S. parringtonii, such as the prominent median crest on the nasals and the
telescoping of the skull such that the nasals nearly reach the
pineal foramen, are diagnostic of that species or of the genus as a
whole.
SANGUSAURUS EDENTATUS Cox, 1969
(Figs. 3, 4)
Holotype—ZLS 9/1, skull fragments including premaxilla, portions of the right and left maxillae, right prefrontal, squamosal
fragments, temporal bar preserving the parietals and the interparietal, and left and right quadrates.
Type Locality and Horizon—Locality 15 of Drysdall and
Kitching (1963), about 3.5 miles [sic] west of the village of Sitwe,
upper Luangwa Basin (sensu Barbolini et al., 2016), Eastern
Province, Zambia (Cox, 1969) (Fig. 2). Drysdall and Kitching
(1963) described and mapped this locality as including parts of
the upper Ntawere Formation and the lower part of the overlying Red Marl. The distance from Sitwe noted by Cox (1969)
would place the locality near the contact between the Ntawere
Formation and the Red Marl in Locality 15 on Drysdall and
Kitching’s (1963) map, where they noted the presence of fossil
vertebrates. Cox (1969) stated that the specimen originated in
the upper fossiliferous horizon of the Ntawere Formation but
noted that the exact stratigraphic level of the fossil within this
unit could not be determined at the time of collection.

192

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

FIGURE 3. Photographs of the holotype of Sangusaurus edentatus (ZLS 9/1). Snout fragment in A, anterior, B, dorsal, C, ventral, and D, left lateral
views. Right maxilla in E, lateral, F, medial, and G, proximal views. Intertemporal bar in H, dorsal, I, ventral, J, left lateral, and K, posterior views.
Abbreviations: apr, anterior palatal ridge; ip, interparietal; ma, maxillary antrum; mx, maxilla; pa, parietal; pif, pineal foramen; pmx, premaxilla; ppr,
posterior palatal ridge; r pmx, recess for premaxilla; vo, vomer. Scale bar equals 2 cm.

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

193

FIGURE 4. Additional photographs of the holotype of Sangusaurus endentatus (ZLS 9/1). Right prefrontal in A, posterior, B, lateral, and C, dorsal
views. D, possible fragment of zygomatic arch (exact view uncertain). E, possible fragment of zygomatic arch (exact view uncertain). F, possible fragment of squamosal (exact view uncertain). Left quadrate in G, anterior, and H, ventral views. Right quadrate in I, anterior, and J, ventral views.
Abbreviations: fr s, articular surface for the frontal; rug, rugosity. Scale bars equal 2 cm. Upper left scale bar applies to A–C. Upper right scale bar
applies to D–E. Lower right scale bar applies to F–J.

Referred Material—None.
Revised Diagnosis—Can be differentiated from Sangusaurus
parringtonii by presence of low longitudinal ridges flanking the
median ridge on the anterior surface of the premaxilla, absence
of a strong lateral caniniform buttress, approximately circular
postpineal boss; minimum dorsal width of parietals about 58%
of length of the intertemporal bar; and parietal-interparietal
suture ‘W’-shaped in dorsal view.
Remarks—Cox (1969) reported that the material belonging to
the specimen was collected over an area of about 50 square yards
[sic], but due to the comparable size of the parts of the specimen
and the non-duplication of elements, he considered it to belong
to a single individual. We follow this assumption here.
DESCRIPTION
The holotype of S. edentatus consists of several broken and
weathered skull fragments that appear to have undergone little if
any preparation. Many areas of the bones are covered by a thin,
dark red hematitic crust, and in places this is overlain by tan
matrix. Most of the clean areas of the bone appear to have been
exposed by natural weathering processes.
The premaxilla is a single fused element, and as preserved it
includes a portion of the anterior surface of the snout and the
median part of the secondary palate (Fig. 3A–D). The anterior
face of the premaxilla meets the lateral surfaces of the bone at
fairly distinct corners, suggesting a squared-off profile to the
snout. A low, rounded median ridge extends up the ascending
process of the premaxilla and is flanked by smaller lateral ridges
that do not extend far up the snout and may originally have
demarcated the junction between the lateral and anterior surfaces of the snout. The alveolar margin is weakly notched along
the midline, suggesting that the anterior median palatal ridges
originally extended ventrally past the rim of the palate. There is
a suggestion of some rugose texturing on the external surfaces of
the premaxilla, but it is difficult to determine the degree to which
this is a real feature because of the poor exposure of the original
bone surface.
The anterior median palatal ridges are well developed on the
palatal surface of the premaxilla (Fig. 3C), and they do not

converge posteriorly. Their anterior tips are somewhat weathered, but it appears likely that they originally extended ventrally
past the surrounding alveolar margin. A midline groove is present between the anterior ridges and is partially filled with matrix.
There are no lateral anterior palatal ridges. The single posterior
median palatal ridge is incompletely preserved. It is lowest anteriorly and becomes more prominent posteriorly. The posterior
portion of the ridge curves anteroventrally so that it would have
formed a cutting blade along the midline of the oral cavity. Premaxillary teeth are absent.
The dorsal surface of the secondary palate forms the floor of
the nasal cavity (Fig. 3B). This surface is convex dorsally, with a
midline ridge that extends along most of its length. The posterior
section of this ridge is overlapped by an anterior process of the
vomer. The anterior portion of the dorsal surface of the secondary palate, near its junction with the ascending process of the
premaxilla, is covered by a thin layer of matrix. Because of this,
we cannot determine if the pair of rounded depressions present
in S. parringtonii (see below) were also present in S. edentatus.
Parts of the right and left maxillae are preserved in ZLS 9/1
(Fig. 3E–G), but there is a discrepancy in Cox’s (1969) description that makes the interpretation of these fragments somewhat
confusing. In his written description, Cox (1969) states that the
right maxilla is more complete and notes that a recess for articulation with the premaxilla is present near its preserved anterodorsal end. This recess is typically found on the medial surface of
the maxilla in other dicynodonts, but the drawing of the specimen that shows the recess (Cox, 1969:fig. 23a) is labeled as a lateral view. Because having a large recess for the premaxilla on
the lateral surface of the maxilla would be very unusual for a
dicynodont, and because it is not consistent with the morphology
found in the more complete and articulated specimens of
S. parringtonii known from Tanzania, we consider the caption of
Cox’s (1969) figure 23 to contain a typographical error and to
show a medial view of the right maxilla. This reinterpretation
has important implications for Cruickshank’s (1986a) comparisons of the shapes of the caniniform processes in S. edentatus and
S. parringtonii (see below). Our description focuses on the more
complete right maxilla except where otherwise noted.
The caniniform process forms the majority of the preserved
portion of the right maxilla (Fig. 3E, F). The lateral surface of

194

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

the element is still covered by matrix and is rather nondescript. It
is fairly flat and is not strongly ornamented. A strong lateral caniniform buttress is not present, although the maxilla is thicker
posteriorly near the body of the caniniform process. The caniniform process tapers distally to a blunt tip that is angled anteromedially relative to the apparent midline of the skull. The
alveolar margin anterior to the caniniform process slopes anterodorsally, giving the ventral edge of the maxilla a somewhat
stepped appearance in lateral and medial views.
In medial view, the preserved anterodorsal portion of the maxilla is flat and forms a large articular surface for the premaxilla
(Fig. 3F). This area is separated from the caniniform process by
a low ridge that is subhorizontal posteriorly but slopes anteroventrally near the anterior edge of the element. As Cox (1969)
noted, when the posterior section of this ridge is held horizontally, the long axis of the caniniform process is angled anteroventrally. The medial surface of the caniniform process is convex
medially, such that most of the thickness of the process is developed on its medial side. The bone surface of the medial side of
the caniniform process is still covered by matrix, but there are a
few areas where the bone is nearly exposed that suggest that the
surface texture was rugose. A wide, shallow groove is present on
the posterior surface of the caniniform process, which is bordered laterally by a flange of the facial surface of the maxilla that
extends posteriorly past the level of the caniniform process.
The broken dorsal edge of the right maxilla exposes the
matrix-filled maxillary antrum, and the exposed portion
should be close to the proximal end of this sinus (Fig. 3G).
The matrix infilling is trapezoidal, and it seems likely that
this is a close approximation to the actual shape of the space
at this level. The left maxilla fragment appears to expose a
portion of the maxillary antrum that is closer to the apex of
the caniniform process, which is round in cross-section. There
is no evidence of a tusk in either maxilla, and there are no
‘postcanine’ teeth.
Cox (1969:287) noted the presence of an isolated right prefrontal among the material he assigned to S. edentatus, but he only
stated that it showed “no features of significance.” As preserved,
the bone is crescent-shaped, with a pointed anterior end and a
squared-off posterior surface (Fig. 4A–C). The lateral margin of
the bone is rugose and likely had an original appearance similar
to the rugose prefrontals of S. parringtonii (see below). The posterior surface of the bone bears a number of straight, transverse
ridges and grooves that presumably interlocked with similar features on the frontal. The medial and ventral surfaces are gently
concave.
A relatively complete intertemporal bar is preserved in ZLS 9/
1. It consists of the parietals and the interparietal (Fig. 3H–K).
In dorsal view, the anterior end of the bar bears a ‘U’-shaped
notch that is surrounded by the parietals and represents the posterior portion of the pineal foramen (Fig. 3H). A low, circular
boss is located just posterior to the foramen. Its surface texture is
slightly more rugose than that of the surrounding dorsal surface
of the parietals. This boss is similar in position to that reported
in Rechnisaurus cristarhynchus (Roy-Chowdhury, 1970; Bandyopadhyay, 1989), although it is more circular. It also shows some
resemblance to the postpineal boss present in at least some specimens of S. parringtonii (e.g., NMT RB42), although in the latter
species the boss is located further posteriorly on the skull roof
and is more oval (see below). A prominent midline suture
between the parietals is present. Cox (1969) noted that the dorsal
surface of the temporal bar is concave in cross-section, with the
lateral edges of the parietals forming raised ridges that flank a
median trough. The median trough is relatively wide and more
closely resembles that preserved in NMT RB42 than the very
narrow, deep trough present in UMZC T1226 (both S. parringtonii). Cox (1969) speculated that the postorbitals likely overlapped at least part of the lateral ridges, and this is borne out by

the more complete temporal bars in NMT RB42 and UMZC
T1226. However, the lateral surfaces of the ridges (Fig. 3J) are
not prepared well enough to determine whether they bore the
corrugations found in this area in S. parringtonii (see below).
There also does not seem to be evidence of the deep depression
at the anteroventral corner of the lateral surface of the parietal,
which articulates with a rounded convexity on the medial surface
of the postorbital in S. parringtonii.
The interparietal forms the posterior end of the temporal bar
(Fig. 3H, I, K). The element is anteroposteriorly shorter at the
midline than it is at the lateral margins of the skull, giving the
posterior edge a ‘V’-shaped profile in dorsal view. About halfway
along their length, the angle between the arms of the ‘V’
becomes more acute, forming a central notch along the posterior
border of the skull roof. The interparietal meets the parietals
along a highly interdigitated, ‘W’-shaped suture. Near the lateral
edges of the skull roof, the parietal-interparietal suture turns
posteriorly, such that the interparietal also contacts the parietals
laterally. The posterolateral corners of the temporal bar are
damaged, making it uncertain whether the interparietal contacted the squamosals. Cox (1969) stated that the occipital surface of the interparietal sloped strongly anteriorly, meeting the
dorsal surface of the bone at an angle of about 25 . This caused
him to hypothesize that the temporal bar was angled posterodorsally, and that it overhung the occipital plate. Comparison with
more complete specimens of S. parringtonii (especially NMT
RB42) confirms that Cox was partially correct and provides additional insight into the probable original morphology of the temporal bar and occiput. In S. parringtonii, the posterior processes
of the parietal extend posteriorly past the level of the occipital
plate, contributing to the ‘V’-shaped appearance of the posterior
edge of the skull roof. To accommodate this emargination, the
posterior end of the temporal bar extends posteriorly past the
level of the occipital plate as well. As a result, the posterior surfaces of the parietals and interparietal slope anteriorly to meet the
occipital plate, which is oriented vertically. The angle between
the dorsal and occipital surfaces of the interparietal is steeper in
S. edentatus than in S. parringtonii, suggesting that the overhang
of the temporal bar over the occiput was greater in S. edentatus.
Alternatively, the anterior slope of the interparietal in S. edentatus could have been exaggerated by dorsoventral flattening,
although the other parts of the skull do not show strong evidence
of such deformation.
Two fairly large fragments of bone that have complexly
curved surfaces may represent parts of the squamosal of ZLS
9/1 (Fig. 4F). The finished edges of these fragments are quite
thick and rugose, which contrasts strongly with the generally
thin, smooth edges of the squamosal of S. parringtonii (see
below) but is somewhat reminiscent of the condition seen in
Angonisaurus (Hancox et al., 2013; Sidor et al., 2014). Two
elongate, flattened to subrounded fragments of bone may
represent portions of the zygomatic arch, but this is uncertain
(Fig. 4D, E).
Specimen ZLS 9/1 includes isolated left and right quadrates
(Fig. 4G–J). As is typical of dicynodonts, the articular portion
of the quadrate is expanded and consists of two articular surfaces separated by a groove. The lateral condyle is wider
than the medial one, but they have close to the same anteroposterior length. Differences in size and shape of the articular surfaces of the quadrates (Fig. 4H, J) raise the possibility
that the elements represent two individuals, but this cannot
be stated with complete certainty. A short, triangular process
projects dorsally from the articular portion of the quadrate
and would have articulated with the squamosal in life. Its
posterior surface is rugose and gently convex. A prominent
raised boss is present on the medial surface of the medial
condyle of the right quadrate (Fig. 4I), perhaps representing
an articular surface for the stapes.

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus
SANGUSAURUS PARRINGTONII Cruickshank, 1986a
(Figs. 5–13)
Holotype—UMZC T1226, partial skull and partial mandible.
Type Locality and Horizon—Locality 328 of Nowack (1937),
Ngaka sub-basin (sensu Kaaya, 1992), Ruhuhu Basin, Tanzania
(Fig. 2). Nowack’s (1937) map places this locality about 1.7 km
southwest of the closest approach of the Ndatira River (Kiteho
of Cox, 1991) and about 2.1 km northwest of the base of the
highlands that form the southeast margin of this section of the
basin. Nowack (1937) considered this locality to fall in his middle
horizon of the Manda Beds (K8) of Stockley and Oates (1931)
and Stockley (1932) (now the Lifua Member of the Manda Beds;
Markwort, 1991). Based on the geographic location of this site,
we agree that it is most likely in the middle to upper portion of
the Lifua Member (see Smith et al., 2018, for discussion of fossilbearing horizons in the Lifua Member).
Referred Material—UMZC T1225, complete right femur and
left femur missing its proximal end, from Locality 328 of Nowack
(1937). These specimens were collected in association with the
holotype of S. parringtonii and are of the correct size to belong
to that individual. The right femur includes a series of tooth
impressions that constitute the holotype of the ichnofossil Mandaodonites coxi Cruickshank, 1986b. UMZC T1340, partial skull
and partial mandible, from Locality 329 of Nowack (1937). Nowack’s (1937) map places this locality about 100 m due north of
the type locality, and he considered it to sample the same stratigraphic horizon of the Lifua Member of the Manda Beds. NMT
RB42, nearly complete skull, associated with two isolated dorsal
vertebrae, nearly complete pelvis, distal humerus fragment
(Fig. 5). This specimen was discovered at a locality in the Ketewaka-Mchuchuma sub-basin (sensu Kaaya, 1992), west of the
other occurrences of S. parringtonii in the Ruhuhu Basin
(Fig. 2). The locality is about 4.6 km northeast of the village
school in Litumba Ndyosi and about 1.4 km from the closest
approach of the Ruhuhu River. Detailed locality information is
available to qualified researchers from the National Museum
of Tanzania or from K.D.A. Smith et al. (2018) place fossil
occurrences in this area in the mid Lifua Member, and they discuss the sedimentology and taphonomy of nearby localities,
which they consider to represent distal floodplain pond deposits.

FIGURE 5. NMT RB42 shortly after discovery in the Lifua Member (Manda Beds,
Ruhuhu Basin, Tanzania).

195

A skull of the traversodontid cynodont Scalenodon angustifrons
(NMT RB31) was found within the skull during collection. Four
edentulous cynodont jaws tentatively referred to S. angustifrons
(NMT RB32, RB33, RB34, RB35), and an indeterminate cynodont femur (NMT RB353) were found nearby at the same
locality.
Revised Diagnosis—Can be differentiated from Sangusaurus
edentatus by absence of low longitudinal ridges flanking the
median ridge on the anterior surface of the premaxilla, strong
lateral caniniform buttress, oval postpineal boss (absent in
UMZC T1226), minimum dorsal width of parietals less than
about 37% of length of intertemporal bar, and parietal-interparietal suture ‘U’-shaped to ‘V’-shaped in dorsal view.
Remarks—The skull of S. parringtonii presents several highly
distinctive features, including extremely rugose ornamentation
of the premaxilla, the maxillae, the nasals, and the prefrontals;
strongly developed midline crest on the premaxilla and the
nasals; nasals that extend nearly to the pineal foramen, such that
the frontals are exposed as a narrow strip on the dorsal surface
of the snout; and strongly developed boss on the frontals anterior
to the pineal foramen. Of these, the telescoping of the skull that
results in the nasals nearly reaching the pineal foramen is unique
among dicynodonts and therefore a useful autapomorphy. However, the highly fragmentary nature of the only known specimen
of S. edentatus prevents most of these characters from being
assessed in that species. Therefore, it is unclear whether they are
diagnostic of S. parringtonii or the genus Sangusaurus.
DESCRIPTION
Skull
The premaxillae (Figs. 6–8) are indistinguishably fused, and
the resulting single element forms the anterior portion of the
snout. Anteriorly, the premaxilla is strongly squared-off (Figs.
6A, B, 8C), with its anterior surface meeting the lateral surfaces
at nearly right angles, and it is heavily sculptured by large vascular foramina and rugose texturing of the bone. A low midline
ridge begins near the alveolar margin and extends up the anterior face of the premaxilla, becoming more prominent until it
merges with the midline crest on the nasals. The smaller ridges

196

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

near the edges of the anterior surface of the premaxilla observed
in the holotype of S. edentatus are not apparent in either of the
S. parringtonii specimens in which this area is preserved (NMT
RB42, UMZC T1226). The anterior median palatal ridges project below the level of the alveolar margin in anterior view,
and this likely resulted in a morphology similar to the tomiodonts of extant turtles (Moldowan et al., 2015) when the
keratinous beak was present. Dorsally, the premaxilla tapers
to a pointed process that is clasped between the nasals, and
this ascending process is well separated from the frontals by
the long internasal suture (Figs. 6A, B, 8C). The lateral
expression of the premaxilla-nasal suture is difficult to differentiate, but preserved morphology in NMT RB42 suggests
that the nasal might have formed more of the anterior margin of the external naris than is the case in most dicynodonts
(Figs. 7A, B, 8A). In the more complete specimens (NMT
RB42 and UMZC T1226), the premaxilla is overlapped by
the maxilla on the lateral surface of the skull, forming a
long, straight suture that extends subvertically from the ventral edge of the external naris to the alveolar margin (Figs.
7A, B, 8A). The broken surface on the right side of UMZC
T1340 shows that this overlap results from the premaxilla
slotting into a recess on the medial surface of the maxilla,
similar to the recess that is visible in the holotype of S. edentatus. The anteroventral corner of the septomaxilla rests on
the premaxilla (Figs. 7A, B, 8A).
On the ventral surface of the skull, the premaxilla forms
the majority of the secondary palate (Figs. 6C, D, 8D, E).
The anterior median palatal ridges are strongly developed,
separated by a median groove, and do not converge posteriorly. Their ventral surfaces are visible in lateral view, in contrast to most Permian dicynodonts, where the ridges are
hidden in lateral view by the rim of the palate (Fig. 7A, B).
There are no lateral anterior ridges. The single posterior
median palatal ridge is relatively low and rounded anteriorly,
but it becomes much more prominent posteriorly, extending
some 32mm beyond the surrounding surface of secondary
palate at its highest point in NMT RB42. The posterior section of the ridge curves anteroventrally, such that it forms a
near-vertical cutting blade located along the midline of the
oral cavity. There are no distinct grooves or vascular channels lateral to the posterior median ridge. The suture
between the premaxilla and maxilla is primarily located on
the lateral wall of the palate and is relatively straight. The
palatine contacts the posterior edge of the premaxilla laterally, and the vomer contacts the posterior median palatal
ridge. There is no premaxillary dentition.
The snout of UMZC T1226 is broken in such a way that
the dorsal surface of the premaxillary secondary palate,
which forms the floor of the nasal cavity, can be examined.
Most of the anterior portion of this surface is broad and flat.
There is a small, round depression on either side of the midline near the anterior wall of the nasal cavity, and the depressions are separated by a low, rounded ridge. Posteriorly, the
floor of the nasal cavity slopes posteroventrally on either side
of a raised midline ridge formed by an anterior process of
the vomer. Lateral to the anterior process of the vomer, a
blind, rounded pocket is formed between the premaxilla
(floor) and the septomaxilla, the nasal, and the maxilla (lateral wall).
The septomaxilla is triangular in lateral view, with the apex of
the triangle oriented posterodorsally (Figs. 7A, B, 8A). In contrast to other dicynodonts, in which the septomaxilla is recessed
within the nostril, the septomaxilla of S. parringtonii has a prominent facial exposure that is wedged between the nasal and maxilla, forming the posterior border of the external naris. The
anteroventral corner of the septomaxilla contacts the premaxilla,
but the septomaxilla does not contact the lacrimal. As preserved,

neither UMZC T1226 nor NMT RB42 shows strong evidence of
a septomaxillary canal or foramen, although we cannot
completely rule out incomplete preservation as the cause of this
absence.
Given the relatively large size of S. parringtonii, the external
naris is surprisingly small (about 27 mm along its greatest dimension in NMT RB42, a skull with a basal length of 335 mm) (Figs.
7A, B, 8A). The dorsal edge of the naris in UMZC T1226 is
straight and nearly horizontal, but this appears to be an artifact
of dorsoventral flattening. Specimen NMT RB42 preserves the
three-dimensional shape of the snout more faithfully, and there
the dorsal edge of the external naris has a saddle shape that is
somewhat reminiscent of that seen in Dinanomodon (Kammerer
et al., 2011).
The maxilla is a large element that forms the majority of the
lateral surface of the snout (Figs. 7A, B, 8A, B). Anteriorly, the
premaxilla slots into a recess in the maxilla, such that the lateral
surface of the maxilla overlaps the premaxilla. The external manifestation of this contact is a relatively straight suture that
extends anteroventrally from the ventral edge of the external
naris to the alveolar margin. The septomaxilla contacts the maxilla near the dorsal end of the premaxilla-maxilla suture, and
together the septomaxilla and premaxilla exclude the maxilla
from the margin of the external naris. Posterior to the contact
with the septomaxilla, the maxilla presents a thin, sharp ridge
that trends in the same direction as the premaxilla-maxilla suture
and nearly reaches the suture between the maxilla and the nasal.
This ridge is best preserved in NMT RB42, and it forms the anterior margin of a rounded fossa on the lateral surface of the maxilla that is located between the external naris, the margin of the
orbit, and the lateral caniniform buttress. This is somewhat similar to the postnarial excavation reported in some dicynodonts,
such as Parakannemeyeria and Sinokannemeyeria (e.g., VegaDias et al., 2004), although it differs in not being contiguous with
the external naris itself. Above the fossa, the maxilla contacts
the nasal along a straight suture.
Posterior to the fossa, the maxilla extends to the anterior margin of the orbit. Oddly, there is essentially no exposure of the
prefrontal and the lacrimal on the lateral side of the snout in
front of the anterior margin of the orbit (Figs. 7A, B, 8A, B).
Instead, these bones articulate with the posterior surface of the
maxilla to form the inner surface of the anterior wall of the orbit.
The size of the contact between maxilla and prefrontal is difficult
to assess due to poor preservation of sutures in the available
specimens. Both UMZC T1226 and NMT RB42 suggest a very
small contact, whereas the left side of UMZC T1340 shows a
somewhat larger contact. Broken surfaces in this area in UMZC
T1340 and NMT RB42 show that the interior surface of the maxilla bears a series of ridges and grooves that interlock with similar
structures on the lacrimal, implying a very rigid connection
between the bones. More posteriorly, the jugal contacts the maxilla to form the floor of the orbit and the base of the zygomatic
arch, and the maxilla bears a small zygomatic process that meets
the anterior tip of the squamosal along a straight contact. The
lateral surface of the zygomatic process bears a weak ornamentation of fine longitudinal striations.
Most of the lateral surface of the maxilla, including the
caniniform process, is highly rugose and heavily pitted,
although the fossa anterior to the orbit has a smoother texture (Figs. 7A, B, 8A, B). The areas of the snout inferred to
be covered by the keratinous beak of dicynodonts typically
present a somewhat rugose texture and numerous small vascular foramina, but the extreme degree to which this ornamentation is developed in S. parringtonii suggests that the
keratin covering was unusually thick and possibly more ornamented than in other dicynodonts.
The caniniform process is well developed, but no tusk is present (Figs. 7A, B, 8A, B). The process tapers distally to a bluntly

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus
pointed tip. As in S. edentatus, the tip of the caniniform process is
angled anteromedially relative to the rest of the skull, although
the caniniform process is contiguous with the rest of the alveolar
margin (i.e., it is not set off by a notch as in pylaecephalids).
When the pterygoids are positioned horizontally, the caniniform
process is strongly anteroventrally angled, so that the apex is
close to the level of the external naris, well anterior of the anterior margin of the orbit. A very strong lateral caniniform buttress
is present, which contrasts with the much flatter lateral surface of
the maxilla in S. edentatus. Cruickshank (1986a) noted the difference in the cross-sectional shape of the caniniform process in S.
edentatus and S. parringtonii and used this feature to differentiate the species, although this is complicated by the fact that he
reversed the lateral and medial surfaces of the process in S. edentatus, likely as a result of the incorrect label in Cox’s (1969) figure
(see above). Despite the strong lateral caniniform buttress, the
posterior surface of the caniniform process is relatively flat. A
low ridge extending from the alveolar margin near the tip of the
process to near the base of the zygomatic arch separates the
areas with highly rugose bone texturing from a smoother area
closer to the contact with the pterygoid. This may correspond to
the posterior edge of the keratinous beak in life. There is no
postcaniniform crest or keel comparable to the structures seen in
cryptodonts and emydopoids, respectively, although the alveolar
margin posterior to the caniniform process does come to a fairly
sharp edge (Fig. 6C, D).
A labial fossa surrounded by the maxilla, the jugal, and the
palatine is present, and its structure is best preserved in UMZC
T1226 (Fig. 8E). The labial fossa opens into the maxillary
antrum, portions of which are exposed through breakage in all
three skulls. As in S. edentatus, the antrum appears to have
extended through most of the caniniform process and was relatively narrow and tubular. There is no evidence of an unerupted
tusk in any of the specimens, and there are no maxillary
‘postcanine’ teeth.
The maxilla makes little contribution to the secondary palate,
but it does form much of the lateral wall of the oral cavity (Figs.
6C, D, 7D, E). The palatal suture between maxilla and premaxilla is relatively straight for most of its length. Posteriorly, the
palatine and pterygoid contact the maxilla on the ventral surface
of the skull.
Together, the nasals form almost the entire dorsal surface of
the snout, with only a narrow exposure of the frontals separating
them from the pineal foramen (Figs. 6A, B, 8C). This morphology is unique among dicynodonts and gives the skull a distinctly
telescoped appearance.
The most striking feature of the nasals is the tall crest that runs
along the midline of the snout and includes the internasal suture
(Figs. 6A, B, 7A, B, 8C). The anterior end of the crest bifurcates
to clasp the ascending process of the premaxilla, and it forms a
continuation of the midline ridge on the anterior surface of the
premaxilla. Moving posteriorly, the crest becomes increasingly
prominent, and it reaches its tallest point at the nasal-frontal
suture, where it stands about 40 mm above the surrounding surface of the snout in NMT RB42. The surface of the nasals lateral
to the midline crest is relatively flat anteriorly, but the posterolateral and posterior edges of the bone are raised, such that a
rounded fossa is present on each side of the ridge near its posterior end. The nasal crest of S. parringtonii is superficially similar
to those of Rechnisaurus cristarhynchus (Roy-Chowdhury, 1970;
Bandyopadhyay, 1989) and Kannemeyeria lophorhinus (Crozier,
1970; Keyser and Cruickshank, 1979; Renaut, 2000; see Renaut
et al., 2003, for information on the taxonomy of this species) but
differs in important ways from the morphologies present in each
of those species. In R. cristarhynchus, the nasal crest is flanked
by much more prominent depressions for its entire length (Bandyopadhyay, 1989) and the frontals have a large exposure on the
skull roof that prevents the crest from closely approaching the

197

pineal foramen. The crest is wider and has a more rounded dorsal edge in K. lophorhinus, and it extends onto the frontals,
although it does not approach the pineal foramen as closely as
the crest of S. parringtonii.
Lateral to the midline crest, each nasal bears an anteroposteriorly elongate nasal boss (Figs. 6A, B, 7A, B, 8A, C). The bosses
are not strongly raised relative to the surrounding dorsal surface
of the skull roof, but they overhang the external naris and postnarial fossa of the maxilla. As such, they are more strongly
defined in lateral view than in anterior or dorsal view. The bone
surface of the nasal bosses is highly rugose and bears numerous,
deep vascular channels. This ornamentation is similar to that of
the premaxilla and maxilla and suggests that the nasal bosses
were likely covered by the same thick, keratinous covering. The
medial portions of the nasals and the nasal crest are less rugose
and pitted, although some presumed vascular channels are visible on the left side of the crest in NMT RB42, suggesting that
these areas also were covered by extensions of the keratinous
beak. Posteriorly, the nasals contact the prefrontals and frontals
along a prominent ‘W’-shaped suture.
In lateral view, the nasal forms the dorsal border of the snout
(Figs. 7A, B, 8A). It forms the dorsal margin of the external
naris, and the nasal boss overhangs the naris and contacts the
septomaxilla and the maxilla along a relatively straight, subhorizontal suture. The heavy ornamentation of the nasal bosses continues onto the lateral surface of the nasals but ends abruptly at
the nasal-maxilla suture. The posterior edge of the lateral surface
of the nasal contacts the prefrontal. Much like the case with the
lacrimal and the maxilla, the prefrontal articulates with the posterior surface of the nasal, as opposed to having a distinct facial
portion that contacts the nasal on the lateral surface of the snout
as in most dicynodonts. Unusually, the nasal does not contact the
lacrimal. Lack of contact between the lacrimal and the nasal has
been reported in Kannemeyeria (Renaut, 2000) but otherwise is
unknown in dicynodonts.
The prefrontal is a relatively small, crescent-shaped element,
but it makes important contributions to the margins of the orbit
(Figs. 6A, B, 7A, B, 8A–C). In lateral view, the prefrontal forms
parts of the anterior and dorsal margins of the orbit. The bone
surface in these areas is rugose and pitted, and the prefrontal
essentially forms a continuation of the nasal boss. However, the
dorsal margin of the orbit is not strongly raised above the surrounding surface of the skull roof. As noted above, the prefrontal
lacks a distinct facial exposure but instead articulates with the
posterior surface of the nasal within the orbit. A small contact
with the maxilla also appears to be present, although sutures in
this area are somewhat poorly preserved in the available specimens (the contact is most apparent on the left side of UMZC
T1340). The prefrontal contacts the lacrimal ventrally, just below
the level of the nasal-maxilla suture. Posteriorly, the prefrontal
contacts the small frontal contribution to the orbit. The prefrontal forms much of the anterior and dorsal portions of the interior
surface of the orbit, and its bone texture in this region is very
smooth. The anterior margins of the orbit extend relatively far
medially to partially close off the nasal cavity, but not as extensively as is the case in Myosaurus (Cluver, 1974a).
The lacrimal is a plate-like element that forms parts of the
anterior and ventral margins of the orbit (Figs. 7A, B, 8A–C).
Like the prefrontal, the lacrimal has no real facial exposure,
instead articulating with the posterior surface of the maxilla. As
noted above, UMZC T1340 and NMT RB42 demonstrate that a
series of ridges and grooves on the lacrimal and the maxilla interlocked, providing a firm joint between the bones. The posterior
surface of the lacrimal, which contributes to the interior surface
of the orbit, is best preserved in NMT RB42. This surface is
deeply concave, with its lowest point being a depression on the
anterior wall of the orbit. Presumably this depression terminated
in the lacrimal foramen, although the opening of the foramen

198

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

FIGURE 6. Referred skull of Sangusaurus parringtonii (NMT RB42). A, photograph and B, interpretive drawing in dorsal view. C, photograph and
D, interpretive drawing in ventral view. Abbreviations: apr, anterior palatal ridge; bo, basioccipital; eo, exoccipital; fo, fenestra ovalis; fr, frontal; ip,
interparietal; ipv, interpterygoid vacuity; ju, jugal; mx, maxilla; na, nasal; pa, parietal; pab, parabasisphenoid; pal, palatine; per, periotic; pf, prefrontal;
pif, pineal foramen; pmx, premaxilla; po, postorbital; pp, preparietal; ppr, posterior palatal ridge; pt, pterygoid; sq, squamosal; vo, vomer. Scale bar
equals 6 cm.

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

199

FIGURE 7. Referred specimen of Sangusaurus parringtonii (NMT RB42). A, photograph and B, interpretive drawing of skull in left lateral view. C,
photograph and D, interpretive drawing of skull in posterior view. Left postorbital in E, lateral and F, medial views. G, photograph and H, interpretive
drawing of left squamosal in anterior view. I, photograph and J, interpretive drawing of left squamosal in lateral view. K, photograph and L, interpretive drawing of left squamosal in posterior view. Abbreviations: af, fossa for M. adductor mandibulae externus lateralis; ap, anterior plate; apr, anterior
palatal ridge; bo, basioccipital; eo, exoccipital; epi, epipterygoid; fm, foramen magnum; fo, fenestra ovalis; fr, frontal; ip, interparietal; ju, jugal; la, lacrimal; mx, maxilla; na, nasal; pa, parietal; pab, parabasisphenoid; per, periotic; pf, prefrontal; pmx, premaxilla; po, postorbital; prf, facet for proatlas;
pt, pterygoid; r qd, recess for quadrate; r qj, recess for quadratojugal; smx, septomaxilla; so, supraoccipital; sq; squamosal; tab, tabular; V, trigeminal
notch; VII, facial nerve foramen. Scale bars equal 6 cm. Upper scale bar applies to A–F. Lower scale bar applies to G– L.

200

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

FIGURE 8. Holotype (UMZC T1226) and referred (UMZC T1340) skulls of Sangusaurus parringtonii. A, UMZC T1226 in right lateral view. B,
UMZC T1340 in left lateral view. C, UMZC T1226 in dorsal view. D, UMZC T1226 in ventral view. E, UMZC T1340 in ventral view. F, occipital plate
of UMZC T1340 in anterior view. G, occipital plate of UMZC T1340 in posterior view. Abbreviations: apr, anterior palatal ridge; bo, basioccipital;
bot, basioccipital tuber; eo, exoccipital; fm, foramen magnum; fo, fenestra ovalis; fr, frontal; icf, internal carotid foramen; ip, interparietal; itr, intertuberal ridge; ju, jugal; la, lacrimal; lc, lateral articular condyle of quadrate; lf, labial fossa; lpf, lateral palatal foramen; mc, medial articular condyle of
quadrate; mx, maxilla; na, nasal; pa, parietal; pab, parabasisphenoid; per, periotic; pf, prefrontal; pif, pineal foramen; pmx, premaxilla; po, postorbital;
pp, preparietal; ppr, posterior palatal ridge; pro, prootic; pt, pterygoid; qd, quadrate; qf, quadrate foramen; qj, quadratojugal; smx, septomaxilla; so,
supraoccipital; sq, squamosal. Scale bar equals 6 cm.

itself cannot be clearly seen in the specimen. Dorsally, the lacrimal contacts the prefrontal. Posteriorly, it contacts the jugal, and
breakage on the right side of UMZC T1226 suggests that the elements overlapped along a scarf joint.
A complete jugal is not preserved in any of the three specimens, but together they offer a nearly complete picture of
the morphology of this element (Figs. 6C, D, 7A, B, 8A, C).

As is typical for dicynodonts, the jugal contributes to the
floor of the orbit, the zygomatic arch, and the postorbital
bar. A small piece of the jugal is preserved on the posterior
surface of the maxilla in UMZC T1226, and this shows that
the element contributed to the dorsal margin of the labial
fossa. In UMZC T1340, a portion of the jugal is preserved on
a fragment of the left zygomatic arch. Here, the jugal forms

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus
the medial and much of the ventral surfaces of this part of
the zygoma. It bears a dorsal facet for articulation with the
base of the postorbital bar as well as a lateral groove that
articulates with the anterior end of the zygomatic process of
the squamosal. When this fragment is articulated with the
left maxilla, the lacrimal-jugal suture is located on the floor
of the orbit at the level of the anterior end of the zygomatic
arch. The morphology of NMT RB42 confirms these observations and shows that the facet for the postorbital was somewhat raised above the zygoma, forming the ventral section of
the postorbital bar. However, there is no evidence of a long
dorsal process that extends up the posterior surface of the
postorbital bar, such as that which Cluver and King (1983)
noted for Pelanomodon and Aulacephalodon. The articular
facet bears several low ridges that interlock with similar
ridges on the postorbital. The right jugal has been lost in
NMT RB42, and the exposed articular surface of the maxilla
also is ridged, especially near the base of the zygomatic arch.
The posterior end of the jugal appears to have nearly
reached the fossa for M. adductor mandibulae externus lateralis on the squamosal and may have had a more extensive
lateral exposure near the posterior end of the zygomatic arch
than is typical for dicynodonts (see below).
The frontals of S. parringtonii are well preserved in UMZC
T1226 and NMT RB42, and they present a highly distinctive
morphology (Figs. 6A, B, 7A, B, 8A, C). Typically, the frontals
are broadly exposed on the skull roof in kannemeyeriiforms,
although in some cases they make only a small contribution to
the margins of the orbits (e.g., see Cox, 1965:fig. 29). In contrast, the frontals of S. parringtonii are narrowly exposed on
the skull roof, giving the skull a telescoped appearance in dorsal view. Anteriorly, the frontals contact the nasals and the prefrontals along a curved ‘W’-shaped suture. The appearance of
this contact suggests that the nasal overlaps the frontal to some
degree, but the available specimens do not provide much information about the extent of this overlap. The anteroposteriorly
narrow lateral process of the frontal is wedged between the
prefrontal and the postorbital and makes a minor contribution
to the dorsal margin of the orbit. The lateral and dorsal surfaces of the lateral process bear the same rugose, pitted ornamentation that is found on the prefrontal and nasal. The frontal
widens near the midline of the skull, where it forms a triangular, dorsally convex boss that is clasped anteriorly by the posterior edge of the nasal crest. The bone surface in this area is
weakly rugose but not highly ornamented. Near the midline of
the skull, the preparietal articulates with the frontal on the dorsal and posterior surfaces of this boss. Plate-like processes
extend posteriorly from the frontals and contribute to the temporal bar. These processes nearly completely enclose the pineal
foramen and contact the parietals in UMZC T1226, but poor
preservation of sutures in this area does not allow this to be
confirmed in NMT RB42.
The appearance of UMZC T1226 is suggestive of retaining a
distinct postfrontal (Fig. 8C), an element that is otherwise consistently absent among kannemeyeriiforms. However, this area
of the skull has suffered several large breaks, and the bone surface is highly cracked, making it difficult to definitively trace
sutures. In NMT RB42, a slight break in the contour of the
orbital margin and a subtle change in ornamentation between
the frontal and postorbital is suggestive of an additional element
(i.e., the postfrontal) having been present (Fig. 6A, B), although
clear sutures are no longer visible. We interpret this as evidence
that a distinct postfrontal center of ossification was likely present
at some point in ontogeny, but that it has become indistinguishably fused with the frontal. A similar morphology can occasionally be seen in other dicynodonts that lack postfrontals (e.g.,
NHCC LB117, an extremely well-preserved specimen of
Dicynodontoides).

201

The sutures for the preparietal are difficult to trace, but they
seem best preserved in UMZC T1226 (Fig. 8C). In that specimen, the preparietal has the shape of an asymmetrical diamond,
with the posterior half of the diamond being longer than the
anterior half. The frontal-preparietal suture arises near the midline of the skull just posterior to the nasal-frontal suture. From
there, the suture sweeps laterally to a point that is at about the
same level anteroposteriorly as the suture between the postorbital and the frontal on the dorsal margin of the orbit. The suture
then curves medially so that it is roughly parallel to the long axis
of the skull and becomes highly interdigitated. As such, the preparietal forms the central portion of the skull roof on the frontal
boss and also contributes to the anterior wall of the pineal foramen as the frontal surface of the skull slopes ventrally towards
that opening. The surface of the preparietal is flush with the surrounding bones and bears the same weakly rugose texture as the
frontals where it contributes to the surface of the frontal boss. It
is difficult to assess whether the preparietal was a plate-like element that sat atop the frontals or if it is thicker and has a more
extensive contact.
In dorsal view, the pineal foramen is triangular, with its apex
directed posteriorly (Figs. 6A, B, 8C). The walls of the foramen
are nearly vertical, and there is no significant change in diameter
between the foramen and the pineal tube that extends through
the skull roof down into the braincase. The pineal foramen is not
surrounded by a boss or collar, and it is oriented nearly vertically, as opposed to the more anterodorsal orientation seen in
taxa such as Rhachiocephalus (e.g., Maisch, 2005). Specimen
UMZC T1226 indicates that the pineal foramen is nearly
completely surrounded by the frontal on the dorsal surface of
the skull, although the preparietal contributes to the anterior
wall of the foramen and the parietal contributes to its posterior
wall.
The morphology of the parietals on the dorsal surface of the
skull differs in UMZC T1226 and NMT RB42. In the former
specimen, the parietals contribute to the posterior wall of the
pineal foramen and present a deep, narrow groove along the
midline of the skull (Fig. 8C). A relatively straight suture
between the parietals is visible, but there is no evidence of a boss
similar to that in S. edentatus posterior to the pineal foramen.
Lateral to the groove, the parietals slope dorsolaterally to meet
the postorbitals, which overlap the parietals on the lateral sides
of the skull roof and contribute to the raised lateral edges of the
temporal bar. Posteriorly, the parietals diverge to surround the
centrally located interparietal. A short posterior process of the
parietal is wedged between the interparietal, postorbital, and
squamosal at the posterolateral corner of the skull roof.
The lateral edges of the dorsal surface of the parietals
slope dorsolaterally in NMT RB42, giving the temporal bar a
concave appearance (Fig. 6A, B), but this concavity is much
gentler than in UMZC T1226 and does not form a very distinct midline groove. A boss is present posterior to the pineal
foramen, but it differs from that in S. edentatus in two important ways. First, it is located towards the anteroposterior midpoint of the temporal bar, as opposed to just behind the
pineal foramen in S. edentatus. Second, the boss of S. parringtonii is anteroposteriorly elongate and oval instead of being
roughly circular. The boss also differs from that reported in
Rechnisaurus cristarhynchus (Roy-Chowdhury, 1970; Bandyopadhyay, 1989) in being mediolaterally narrower and located
near the midpoint of the temporal bar, as opposed to arising
just behind the pineal foramen. The parietal-interparietal
suture is not clear in NMT RB42, but the specimen appears
to be similar in having the parietals diverge around the interparietal to form short posterior processes. A midline suture
between the parietals is not apparent in NMT RB42.
The lateral surface of the parietal is best seen on the left side
of NMT RB42 (Fig. 7A, B). Anteriorly, this surface presents a

202

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

well-defined fossa that has a highly striated surface texture. This
fossa receives a rounded, convex surface on the postorbital that
is located near the junction of the postorbital bar and the temporal portion of the postorbital. The surface of this convexity is
similarly highly striated, and the orientation of the striations
closely matches on both elements, with the anterior striations
curving anterodorsally and the posterior ones curving posterodorsally. Posteriorly, the articular surface for the postorbital
becomes flatter and less strongly striated, reflecting the weaker
striations of the medial surface of the postorbital in this region.
The size and shape of the isolated left postorbital of NMT RB42,
and the extent of the articular surface for the postorbital on the
parietal, shows that the temporal portion of the postorbital
extended the entire length of the postorbital bar. Ventral to the
articular surface for the postorbital, the lateral surface of the
parietal is relatively flat, and it contacts the dorsal surfaces of the
prootic and epipterygoid. Unlike the case in most Permian dicynodonts (e.g., Angielczyk and Kurkin, 2003; Maisch, 2003), there
is no distinct fossa for muscle attachment between the ventral
surface of the postorbital and the descending flange of the
parietal.
The postorbital is preserved in UMZC T1226 and NMT RB42.
Perhaps the most informative example of this element is the
complete left postorbital of NMT RB42 (Fig. 7E, F), which is
detached from the skull, although the element has been plastically deformed such that the former lateral surface of the postorbital bar now faces anteriorly. As is typical of dicynodonts, the
postorbital consists of two main parts, the postorbital bar and a
posteriorly directed process that contributes to the intertemporal
skull roof, that are separated by a transitional zone that articulates with the frontal. In NMT RB42, the postorbital bar is flattened such that the original lateral and medial surfaces are quite
broad. The ventral end of the postorbital bar is moderately
expanded, and its medial surface is ridged to interlock with the
jugal. As preserved, the jugal shows no evidence of a dorsally
directed process that extended up the posterior surface of the
postorbital. However, there is a groove on the posteromedial
surface of the postorbital bar in NMT RB42 that is contiguous
with the articular surface for the jugal, suggesting that such a
process might have been present. Anterior to this groove, the
postorbital bar is thickened and somewhat rugose. Near where
the postorbital bar meets the skull roof, this rugosity takes on a
more striated appearance and is contiguous with the ornamented
portions of the prefrontal and frontal contributions of the orbital
margin.
Where the bone transitions from the postorbital bar to the
posterior process, the dorsal surface of the postorbital is flat
and seems to have been flush with the surface of the frontals.
Moving posteriorly, the lateral edge becomes raised as a thin
ridge, which continues as the thin dorsal edge of the posterior process. When the postorbital is articulated with the temporal bar (i.e., the right side of NMT RB42, both sides of
UMZC T1226), this thin edge is slightly taller than the corresponding surface on the parietals, contributing to the dorsally
concave shape of the temporal bar in cross-section (Figs. 6A,
B, 8C). The posterior process is oriented vertically and
attaches to the lateral surface of the temporal bar, in contrast
to the situation in taxa such as Oudenodon, where part of the
posterior process is oriented horizontally and contributes to
the dorsal surface of the skull roof. The process is tallest at
its anterior end, near the transition to the postorbital bar,
and it tapers to a sharp posterior point. The dorsal edge of
the process is relatively straight, so most of this tapering is
accomplished by the ventral edge of the process sloping posterodorsally. The lateral surface of the posterior process is
weakly concave. The posterior tip of posterior process contacts the squamosal but is separated from the interparietal by
the short posterolateral process of the parietal.

The morphology of the medial surface of the temporal portion
of the postorbital is shown well by the left postorbital of NMT
RB42 (Fig. 7F). The whole medial surface of this area is gently
convex anteroposteriorly and dorsoventrally. Where the posterior process arises, the ventral half of the medial surface is thickened to form a convex eminence. This articulates with a fossa
located at the anteroventral corner of the lateral surface of the
parietals. The entire medial surface of the postorbital is covered
by an elaborate system of curving ridges and grooves, which
interlock with similar features on the lateral surface of the parietals. These striations are most prominent on the medial surface
of the transitional zone and the anterior end of the posterior process and become weaker moving posteriorly from there. The
ridges near the transition to the postorbital bar curve anteromedially, whereas those on the posterior process curve
posterodorsally.
The temporal bar of UMZC T1226 appears to be angled posterodorsally relative to the dorsal surface of the snout, with the
break in slope occurring at the level of the pineal foramen
(Fig. 8A). This morphology is similar to that seen in Kannemeyeria, and it is reflected in Cruickshank’s (1986a) reconstruction of
the skull of S. parringtonii. As noted above, though, comparison
of UMZC T1226 with NMT RB42 suggests that the snout of the
former specimen was dorsoventrally compressed during preservation. The temporal bar of NMT RB42 also is angled dorsoventrally, but there is no distinct break in slope apparent at the level
of the pineal foramen. Instead, the angulation of the temporal
bar is a smooth continuation of the sloping profile of the snout.
Because NMT RB42 experienced only a minor amount of lateral
compression, we consider it to better represent the original orientation of the temporal bar relative to the snout.
The squamosal can be subdivided into three processes: a temporal process, a quadrate process, and a zygomatic process. This
basic morphology is common to all dicynodonts, but the squamosal of S. parringtonii also presents a number of unusual features
that contribute to the distinctive appearance and proportions of
the skull in this species (Figs. 7G–L, 8B, E–G). Particularly striking is the transverse breadth of the squamosal, and the fact that it
does not flare posteriorly past the level of the occipital plate. In
NMT RB42, the nearly complete left squamosal is about
204 mm wide; for comparison, the basal length of the skull is
335 mm. Combined with the width of the occipital plate, we estimate the posterior breadth of NMT RB42 originally to have
been slightly over 500 mm.
The temporal process of the squamosal meets the posterior
end of the temporal bar at a ca. 90 angle. It does not curve anteriorly as seen in most Permian dicynodonts and some kannemeyeriiforms such as Kannemeyeria (Renaut, 2000) (Fig. 7G–L).
It forms the posterior wall of the temporal fenestra but does not
contribute to the medial border of the fenestra. The dorsal edge
of the process is near vertical at the contact with the parietal, but
it curves ventrolaterally such that the edge is near horizontal at
its junction with the zygomatic process. For most of its length,
the dorsal edge of the temporal process is quite thin, but it
widens slightly as it merges with the zygomatic process. The temporal process contacts the parietal and the postorbital on the lateral surface of the temporal bar. A contact with the
supraoccipital on the occipital surface of the skull seems likely,
but it is not well preserved in any of the specimens.
The posterior portion of the zygomatic process of the squamosal forms a natural partition that separates the temporal and
quadrate portions of the bone (Fig. 7G–J). The posterior end of
the process, where it joins the rest of the squamosal, is tall,
robust, concave medially, and convex laterally. The ventral portion of the zygomatic process in this area is thick and rounded in
cross-section, but it becomes thinner and more plate-like dorsally. The lateral surface of the zygomatic process forms much of
the medial wall of the fossa for the attachment of M. adductor

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus
mandibulae externus lateralis (e.g., Watson, 1948; Crompton and
Hotton, 1967; Barghusen, 1976; Angielczyk, 2004). The fossa is
oriented vertically, similar to those of Ischigualastia and Jachaleria (Cox, 1965; Ara
ujo and Gonzaga, 1980; Vega-Dias and
Schultz, 2004), and contrasts with the more horizontal orientation reconstructed by Cruickshank (1986a). Where it meets the
temporal and quadrate processes, the dorsal edge of the zygomatic process is thickened and contributes to the convex dorsal
edge of the squamosal: the squamosal is not ‘notched’ in posterior view, in contrast to most Permian dicynodonts (Fig. 7K, L).
In NMT RB42, there is a distinct lateral facet on the anterior
end of the portion of the zygomatic process that is still attached
to the body of the squamosal (Fig. 7I, J). The facet is tallest at its
posterior edge and is contiguous with an extremely rugose surface on the medial side of the process. The position of these features suggests that they are articular surfaces for the posterior
end of the zygomatic process of the jugal, although the lateral
facet implies that the jugal process had a larger lateral exposure
than is usually the case in dicynodonts.
The anterior end of the zygomatic process of the squamosal is
preserved in UMZC T1340 and NMT RB42 (Figs. 7A, B, 8B),
although the latter specimen has undergone less weathering in
this area and seems to preserve the original morphology better.
This part of the squamosal is mediolaterally flattened, and it slots
into a groove in the jugal such that the jugal cradled it medially
and ventrally. The process tapers to a squared-off anterior tip.
The ventral edge of the tip meets the zygomatic process of the
maxilla along a straight contact on the lateral surface of the suborbital bar. The posterior corner of this articular surface on the
squamosal curves ventrally to form a small fossa that receives
the pointed tip of the zygomatic process of the maxilla. The lateral side of the zygomatic process of the squamosal is divided
into two surfaces by a sharp ridge that extends posterodorsally
from the fossa for the posterior tip of the maxilla. Dorsal to the
ridge, the lateral surface is weakly concave laterally and bears an
ornamentation of fine striations and small vascular foramina.
This ornamentation is similar to that seen on the beak-bearing
portions of the skull in other dicynodonts, raising the possibility
that a thin, keratinized covering was present below the orbit that
was perhaps contiguous with that covering the more heavily
ornamented dorsal margins of the orbit. Ventral to the ridge, the
lateral surface is smooth, unornamented, and flatter. The dorsal
surface of the squamosal forms the lateral edge of the articular
facet for the footplate of the postorbital bar.
The quadrate process of the squamosal forms the largest
part of the bone. The lateral portion of the process forms a
nearly vertical plate that faces anteriorly and extends laterally from the root of the zygomatic arch (Figs. 7G–L, 8B,
E–G). It forms most of the fossa for the attachment of M.
adductor mandibulae externus lateralis. In UMZC T1340, the
lateral portion of the plate curls strongly anteriorly and
almost no part of the adductor fossa is visible in lateral view
(Fig. 8B, E). In NMT RB42 there is a much weaker anterior
curvature (Fig. 7I, J). It is unclear how much this represents
individual variation, differential taphonomic deformation of
the specimens, or a combination of these factors. The lateral
edge of the squamosal in this area is relatively thin, in contrast to the heavily thickened edge seen in Angonisaurus
(Hancox et al., 2013; Sidor et al., 2014), although the ventrolateral corner of the plate, lateral to the facet for the quadratojugal, bears a striated ornamentation.
Ventral to the root of the zygomatic arch, the quadrate
process has a large area for the articulation for the quadratequadratojugal complex (Fig. 7G, H). This articular surface
can be divided into two main areas. Laterally, there is a
large, shallow triangular facet that receives the quadratojugal.
The lateral portion of this fossa is delimited by a rounded,
ventrolaterally trending ridge that abuts the dorsolateral

203

edge of the quadratojugal, but most of the central portion of
the fossa merges smoothly with the rest of the squamosal.
Medially, the fossa for the quadratojugal is separated from
the articular surface of the quadrate by a sharp subvertical
ridge. This surface is much smaller than that for the quadratojugal and is suboval. Its lateral and medial margins are well
defined, but dorsally it merges smoothly with the rest of the
squamosal. The ventral edge of the quadrate process of the
squamosal is slightly damaged in NMT RB42, but UMZC
T1340 shows that it extensively overlapped the quadratequadratojugal complex such that only the articular surfaces
of the quadrate were visible in posterior view (Fig. 8B).
The posterior (occipital) surface of the squamosal is smooth
and fairly nondescript, although the bone is weakly striated near
its lateral edge (Figs. 7K, L, 8G). A medially facing groove is
present on the medial surface of the bone, which receives the lateral edge of the paroccipital process of the periotic. There is no
evidence for a strong ‘tympanic process’ (sensu Cox, 1959:326) in
this area, but a weak dorsally trending ridge is present at the contact between the squamosal and paroccipital process (best seen
in UMCZ T1340). Above this contact, the squamosal should contribute to the posttemporal fenestra, but this feature is not preserved in either NMT RB42 or UMZC T1340.
None of the specimens of S. parringtonii preserve a complete
vomer. Anteriorly, the vomer overlaps the dorsal surface of the
premaxilla along the midline of the skull, forming part of the
floor of the nasal cavity. In UMZC T1226, the dorsal surface of
the vomer in this area bears a weak groove, but this may represent damage because the vomer in NMT RB42 has a sharp dorsal
edge in this region. The anterior-most end of the mid-ventral
vomerine plate is preserved in UMZC T1226. There it meets the
posterior end of the posterior median palatal ridge. Breakage
reveals that the vomer was dorsoventrally quite tall, spanning
most of the interior height of the posterior median ridge. It is not
possible to determine whether the mid-ventral vomerine plate
was narrow and blade-like or wider with a central trough. The
posterior end of the vomer is preserved in articulation with the
anterior end of the median pterygoid plate in NMT RB42
(Fig. 6C, D). Its ventral surface bears a pair of rounded, posteriorly diverging ridges that form the anterior walls of the interpterygoid vacuity. There is no evidence of a midline suture on any of
the preserved portions of the vomer, so we assume that it was a
single fused element as in most dicynodonts.
The palatines also are poorly preserved in all of the specimens,
but it is clear that their morphology resembled that of other dicynodonts in consisting of an anterior palatine pad that contacted
the maxilla and premaxilla, and a more plate-like posterior portion that contributed to the choana (Figs. 6C, D, 8D, E). The
right palatine pad of UMZC T1340 shows that the palatine pad
was relatively small and that its ventral surface was somewhat
rugose. Anteriorly, the pad twists so that it slopes dorsomedially
where it meets the near-vertical posterior edge of the secondary
palate. Near the posterolateral corner of the palatine pad, the
palatine forms most of the margins of the oval lateral palatal
foramen, although the pterygoid makes a small contribution to
its lateral wall. A small part of the choanal portion of the palatine is preserved in UMCZ T1226, showing that the bone contributed to the margins of the labial fossa.
A distinct ectopterygoid bone appears to be absent. The anterior end of the anterior pterygoid ramus meets a short posterior
process of the maxilla (Fig. 8B), which may have included a center of ossification corresponding to the ectopterygoid at some
stage in ontogeny. However, no suture between this posterior
process and the rest of the maxilla is apparent in any of the three
specimens.
The pterygoids are not completely preserved in any of the
three specimens of S. parringtonii, but it is clear that they had
the ‘X’ shape in ventral view that is typical of dicynodonts (Figs.

204

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

6C, D, 8E). The anterior pterygoid ramus is mediolaterally flattened and relatively straight, forming a strut of bone that extends
between the maxilla and the median pterygoid plate (Figs. 8B,
9). There is no transverse process of the pterygoid. There are
somewhat different morphologies in NMT RB42 and UMZC
T1340 regarding a ventral keel on the anterior ramus. In NMT
RB42, the ventral edge of the anterior-most tip of the right anterior ramus is quite narrow and keel-like, but it is truncated posteriorly by a broken surface (Fig. 6C, D), so it is uncertain how far
posteriorly this narrow ventral edge continued. The ventral edge
of the anterior ramus is more completely preserved in UMZC
T1340 (Fig. 8E), and there it is also fairly narrow but somewhat
more rounded and rugose than the preserved section of NMT
RB42. This rugose edge continues posteriorly to the level of the
median pterygoid plate, where it becomes smoother and thinner
as it merges with the ventral surface of the plate. Anteriorly, the
anterior ramus contacts the maxilla and it is flanked medially by
the palatine. The medial surface of the anterior ramus makes a
small contribution to the lateral wall of the lateral palatal
foramen.
The median pterygoid plate is anteroposteriorly short but
transversely wide, and a sharp edge separates its lateral and ventral surfaces (Figs. 6C, D, 8E). The left and right sides of the ventral surface slope dorsomedially, giving it a somewhat concave
appearance in ventral view. Despite this concavity, the bone surface itself is smooth. There is no evidence of the ridge-like crista
oesophagea seen in most Permian dicynodonts, a ventral projection such as in Placerias (Camp and Welles, 1956; Cox, 1965), or
the midline fossa described in Kannemeyeria (Renaut, 2000).
Posteriorly, the median pterygoid plate contacts the parabasisphenoid, and the footplate of the epipterygoid rests atop the
dorsal surface of the median plate.
Little of the quadrate rami of the pterygoids is preserved (Figs.
6C, D, 8E). They arise from the posterolateral corners of the
median pterygoid plate. Broken surfaces in this area in NMT
RB42 and UMZC T1340 show that the base of the quadrate
ramus was robust and rounded in cross-section. A small portion
of the posterior end of the left quadrate ramus of UMZC T1340
is preserved wedged between the quadrate and the paroccipital
process. This portion of the bone is mediolaterally flattened and
plate-like.
A small (about 9% of the basal length of the skull), diamondshaped interpterygoid vacuity is preserved in NMT RB42
(Fig. 6C, D). As is typical of dicynodonts, it is bordered anteriorly by the vomer and posteriorly by the median pterygoid plate.
The anterior edges, formed by the vomer, extend slightly ventrally, but they do not form a prominent ventral torus around the
vacuity such as that in Dolichuranus (Damiani et al., 2007).
A small portion of the left epipterygoid footplate is preserved
near the transition between the median pterygoid plate and the
quadrate ramus of the pterygoid in UMZC T1340, and more
complete left and right footplates are present in NMT RB42
(Figs. 7A, B, 9). The posterior half of the footplate is roughly
rectangular in shape, whereas the dorsal edge of the anterior half
is concave upwards, so that the footplate comes to an anterior
point. A small dorsal projection is present near the midpoint of
the left epipterygoid footplate in NMT RB42, but it is difficult to
say whether this represents the broken remains of the ascending
ramus or if it is the dorsal process noted in other dicynodont taxa
(Angielczyk, 2002). None of the ascending ramus is preserved in
any specimen.
Parts of the fused parasphenoid and basisphenoid (i.e., the
parabasisphenoid) are preserved in all three specimens. In ventral view (Figs. 6C, D, 8D, E), the parabasisphenoid meets the
pterygoid anteriorly, although a distinct suture is not apparent.
Posteriorly, thin laminae of the parabasisphenoid overlap the
anterior surfaces of the basioccipital tubera. Each lamina makes
an extremely limited contribution to the anterior edge of the

facet surrounding the fenestra ovalis. Paired internal carotid
canals are present and located near the midline of the ventral
surface of the skull (in contrast to the more lateral and dorsal
position seen in some basal dicynodonts; e.g., Angielczyk and
Rubidge, 2009, 2013; Angielczyk et al., 2016) (Fig. 8D). The
internal carotid canal exits from a single foramen on the dorsal
surface of the parabasisphenoid, which is best seen in UMZC
T1340. The foramen is oval, with the long axis of the oval running anteroposteriorly.
The cultriform process is best preserved in NMT RB42. There,
it is incorporated into a single, plate-like median ossification
(Fig. 9), to which the presphenoid and the fused mesethmoid
and orbitosphenoid (the anterior plate of Sullivan and Reisz,
2005; see Cluver, 1971, for a detailed discussion of this element)
also contribute. Presumably, the parasphenoid primarily contributed to the more posterior and ventral portions of this ossification, but sutures between the elements are not readily visible.
Varying degrees of contact and fusion of the anterior plate, presphenoid, and cultriform process have been reported in dicynodontoids (including kannemeyeriiforms; e.g., Huene, 1935;
Camp, 1956; Ewer, 1961; Cox, 1968; Cluver, 1971; Renaut, 2000),
although contact between the anterior plate and the cultriform
process is absent or variable in at least some more basal dicynodonts (e.g., Cox, 1959; Barry, 1968; Sullivan and Reisz, 2005;
Angielczyk and Rubidge, 2013; Angielczyk et al., 2016). The
ventral edge of the median ossification bisects the dorsal expression of the interpterygoid vacuity and is flanked on either side by
rounded openings leading down into the vacuity. A distinct presphenoid is not visible. We assume that it is incorporated into
the median ossification and sutures delimiting it are no longer
visible.
The anterior plate itself forms the dorsal portion of the
median ossification (Fig. 9), but again the exact sutures delimiting it are no longer apparent. Most of the posterior surface
of the median ossification forms a thin edge, but just below
the level of their contact with the ventral edges of the parietals, the left and right sides diverge to form an open canal that
courses anteriorly. The canal opens anteriorly through a pair
of bilaterally symmetric foramina located about halfway along
the anteroposterior length of the median ossification, and a
strong anteroventrally directed ridge extends from the lower
corner of the foramen on the lateral surface of the median
ossification. Anterior to the foramina, the median ossification
thickens slightly, and a weak ridge extends posteroventrally
from this thickening. The location and orientation of this ridge
suggests that it might mark the original boundary between the
cultriform process and the anterior plate. A small oval hole is
present near the anterodorsal end of the median ossification,
but the uneven edges of the opening and its location along a
crack in the median ossification lead us to conclude that it
most likely represents damage instead of a real feature. The
median ossification forms an essentially complete median septum separating the orbits.
The basioccipital forms the posterior end of the basicranium
and extends onto the occipital plate (Figs. 6C, D, 7A–D, 8E–G).
The basioccipital tubera are strongly developed and are oriented
nearly vertically. They are formed almost exclusively by the
basicoccipital, although a thin lamina of the parabasiphenoid
laps onto their anterior surfaces. Distinct ridges leading from the
parabasisphenoid onto the tubera, such as seen in many basal
dicynodonts, are absent. The stapedial facet is semicircular when
viewed from below, and it slopes strongly dorsolaterally, such
that it opens laterally and ventrally. The fenestra ovalis itself is
small compared with the overall size of the tuber, and it is
located close to the lateral side of the stapedial facet.
Specimens UMZC T1340 and NMT RB42 differ in the morphology of the intertuberal ridge (Figs. 6C, D, 8E). In UMZC
T1340, the anterior portions of the basioccipital tubera are

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

205

FIGURE 9. Detail of the braincase of Sangusaurus parringtonii (NMT RB42) in right lateral view. The black arrow indicates the position of the ventral exit of the pineal tube. The white arrow indicates the position of the foramen leading into the anteroposteriorly aligned canal (see text for details).
Abbreviations: alp, alar process; epi, epipterygoid; ip, interparietal; mo, median ossification; oc, occipital condyle; op, opisthotic portion of the periotic;
pa, parietal; pab, parabasisphenoid; pla, pila antotica; po, postorbital; pro, prootic portion of the periotic; pt, pterygoid; so, supraoccipital; su?, ridge
marking possible remains of suture between anterior plate and cultriform process. Scale bar equals 2 cm.

separated by a depression, with the intertuberal ridge having the
form of a low, rounded ridge running between the medial surfaces of the tubera at about the same level (anteroposteriorly) as
the fenestra ovalis. The anterior depression is much less prominent in NMT RB42 (although this might be exaggerated by
breakage in the median pterygoid plate), and a tall, thick mass of
bone connects the medial surfaces of the tubera for their entire
length and roughly half their height. The cause and significance
of this variation is uncertain.
Posteriorly, the basioccipital forms the ventral lobe of the
three-lobed occipital condyle (Figs. 7C, D, 8G). A central
depression is present between the lobes of the condyle, but the
sutures between the lobes are fused in both NMT RB42 and
UMZC T1340. The basioccipital forms the ventral margin of the
jugular foramen, which appears to have been quite small in S.
parringtonii. In NMT RB42, a thin lamina that projects laterally
from the side of the exoccipital portion of the occipital condyle
overhangs the jugular foramen, screening it off when the occiput
is viewed from behind. Laterally, the basioccipital contacts the
paroccipital process of the periotic.
A stapes in not preserved in any of the three specimens of S.
parringtonii.

The left quadrate-quadratojugal complex is preserved in
UMZC T1340 (Fig. 8B, E–G). The quadrate consists of the
expanded ventral condyles that articulate with the mandible and
a short dorsal process that articulates with the squamosal. The
dorsal process is subrectangular and slots into a thin-walled fossa
on the squamosal (the fossa is best seen in NMT RB42; Fig. 7G,
H). The anterior edge of the dorsal process is thin and appears to
be broken. This raises the possibility that an anterior process
similar to that reported in Jachaleria (Keyser, 1974; Araujo and
Gonzaga, 1980) was present, but better-preserved material will
be necessary to test this conjecture. The articular surface of the
quadrate is similar to those of other dicynodonts in consisting of
anteroposteriorly elongate lateral and medial condyles that are
separated by a central groove. The lateral and medial condyles
are subequal in length (a free-floating piece of bone attached to
the lateral condyle by an area of matrix makes it seem somewhat
longer than the medial condyle), and the lateral condyle is wider
than the medial. The articular surfaces of both condyles are
weakly convex, but they are somewhat flatter than is typical in
many dicynodonts. Specimen UMZC T1340 shows that the articular condyles of the quadrate are angled anterodorsally when
the quadrate is in articulation with the squamosal, such that the

206

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

articular surfaces of the condyles primarily face anteriorly
instead of ventrally.
The quadratojugal is a triangular plate-like element
(Fig. 8F). Its ventral edge is firmly fused to the lateral condyle of the quadrate, but most of the bone is free and rests
in a fossa on the squamosal. Primitively in dicynodonts, the
exterior surface of the quadratojugal faces primarily laterally.
However, in S. parringtonii, the quadratojugal has rotated so
that its external surface faces anteriorly. A comparable morphology has been described for Stahleckeria and Ischigualastia (Huene, 1935; Romer and Price, 1944; Cox, 1965; Keyser,
1974), and the quadratojugal of Stahleckeria bears a particularly striking resemblance to that of Sangusaurus (compare
Fig. 8F with Huene, 1935:pl. 6, fig. 1). Near the ventrolateral
corner of the squamosal, the margin of the quadratojugal
fossa of the squamosal becomes a distinct ventrolaterally
trending ridge that braces the dorsolateral edge of the quadratojugal. The relationship between the quadratojugal and
the squamosal ridge is clearly seen on the left side of UMZC
T1340, and the ridge itself is also well preserved in NMT
RB42, although the quadrate-quadratojugal complex is not
preserved in the latter specimen. The change in orientation
of the quadratojugal relative to the quadrate has caused the
quadrate foramen to be reduced to a teardrop-shaped vertical
slit that is only visible in anterior view. Like the quadratojugal, the morphology of the quadrate foramen closely resembles that of Stahleckeria (Huene, 1935).
The interparietal of Sangusaurus parringtonii (Figs. 6A, B, 7C,
D, 8C, 9) presents a mixture of similarities to and differences
from that of S. edentatus (Fig. 3H, I, K). As in S. edentatus, the
interparietal of S. parringtonii contributes to the dorsal surface
of the intertemporal bar, where it contacts the parietals anteriorly and laterally. However, the parietal-interparietal suture
lacks the distinctive ‘W’ shape seen in S. edentatus; the suture is
instead ‘U’-shaped (UMZC T1226) to ‘V’-shaped (NMT RB42).
The posterior edge of the interparietal also is ‘V’-shaped in S.
parringtonii, but it lacks the central notch seen in S. edentatus.
As noted above, the posterior ends of the parietals extend posteriorly past the level of the occipital plate, and the occipital portion of the interparietal slopes anteriorly to accommodate this
emargination. The angle between the dorsal and posterior surfaces of the interparietal is much less acute in S. parringtonii,
though (ca. 70 in NMT RB42 compared with the 25 Cox [1969]
reported for S. edentatus). The occipital portion of the interparietal is preserved in UMZC T1226 and NMT RB42 (Fig. 7C, D),
but sutures are extremely difficult to discern in either specimen.
It appears that this part of the bone was roughly trapezoidal in
shape (widest dorsally and narrowing ventrally), with contacts
with the tabulars along its lateral edges and a contact with the
supraoccipital ventrally. As preserved, the surface of the bone is
smooth and flat, and there is no evidence of the nuchal crest or
pits seen in some dicynodonts. A facet located adjacent to the
broken right edge of the occiput in NMT RB42 served to accommodate the tabular.
The tabular is not preserved in UMZC T1340; a small triangular fragment of the left tabular appears to be present in UMZC
T1226, but it provides little detail about the element’s morphology. A larger part of the left tabular is preserved in NTM RB42
(Fig. 7C, D). In posterior view, it is superficially plate-like and
spans the distance from the dorsal edge of the occiput to the dorsal margin of the supraoccipital. The broken lateral edge of the
occiput reveals that the tabular is not simply a thin sheet of
bone, but instead has some thickness (e.g., the exposed surface
of the tabular is about 11.6 mm thick near its ventral edge).
When taken together with the facet present on the exposed right
lateral edge of the interparietal, it is clear that the tabular and
the interparietal slotted together at their contact. The break
between the occiput and the left squamosal, and potentially poor

preservation of sutures on the posterior surface of the left squamosal, makes it unclear how far laterally the tabular extended
and to what degree it might have overlapped the squamosal on
the posterior surface of the skull. The hint of a discontinuity on
the posterior surface of the squamosal, and along its broken
medial edge, raises the possibility that the tabular was large and
extended far laterally (Fig. 7K–L), similar to the condition in
Stahleckeria figured by Huene (1935; although note that Romer
and Price, 1944, stated they could not discern a tabular in the
specimen of Stahleckeria that they described). Even if this maximum size of the tabular is assumed, there is no evidence that it
contacted the opisthotic.
Parts of the supraoccipital are present in all three specimens of
Sangusaurus parringtonii (Figs. 7C, D, 8G, 9). The element forms
the central portion of the occipital plate above the foramen magnum, and the bone surface in this region is comparatively featureless. The occipital surface of the supraoccipital is concave in
NMT RB42, such that a vertical groove extends from the suture
with the interparietal to the dorsal margin of the foramen magnum. It is unclear whether this is a real feature or a result of the
lateral compression and shearing that NMT RB42 experienced,
because a similar groove is not apparent in UMZC T1226 or
UMZC T1340, although much less of the supraoccipital is preserved in those specimens. Sutures on the lateral surface of the
braincase are obscure, but it appears likely that in NMT RB42,
the supraoccipital extended anteriorly to contact the prootic and
parietal and to contribute to the posterodorsal walls of the braincase. The ventral suture between the supraoccipital and the
exoccipital, and that between the supraoccipital and the paroccipital process, can be traced with a good deal of certainty on the
posterior surface of UMZC T1340. The suture is horizontal near
the midline of the skull but sweeps upwards more laterally. The
posttemporal fenestra is not preserved in any of the specimens,
so the degree to which the supraoccipital contributed to its margins is uncertain.
The exoccipitals are completely preserved in NMT RB42 and
UMZC T1340 (Figs. 7C, D, 8G), although the sutures surrounding the element are very difficult to distinguish in both specimens. As usual in dicynodonts, the exoccipital contributes to the
occipital plate and the occipital condyle. The occipital portion
appears to be roughly square. Its medial side forms the lateral
margin of the foramen magnum, and the lateral side contacts the
paroccipital process of the periotic. Dorsally, the exoccipital
shares what appears to be a horizontal but slightly irregular
suture with the supraoccipital. The articular facet for the proatlas
has the form of a ventrolaterally sloping ledge located just lateral
to the foramen magnum (best preserved on the left side of NMT
RB42; Fig. 7C, D). A small boss near the ventrolateral tip of the
ledge may represent an accessory articular surface for the atlasaxis complex.
Medially, near the entrance of the foramen magnum, a
small, round foramen pierces the exoccipital, which likely
transmitted the hypoglossal nerve (cranial nerve XII) (e.g.,
Olson, 1944; Camp and Welles, 1956; Cox, 1959; Surkov and
Benton, 2004; Laaß, 2015). A low, rounded ridge forms the
anterior margin of this foramen, and slightly anterior to the
ridge in UMZC T1340 is what seems to be a small blind
fossa, although it is somewhat uncertain whether the fossa is
a real feature or an artifact of preparation. The exoccipitals
form the two dorsal lobes of the occipital condyle. The
sutures between the condylar portions of the exoccipitals and
the basioccipital are no longer evident in UMZC T1340 or
NMT RB42, but a central depression on the posterior surface
of the condyle remains (Figs. 7C, D, 8G). The thin lamina of
bone that projects laterally from the occipital condyle,
screening the ventral expression of the jugular foramen in
posterior view (see description of the basioccipital above), is
formed by the exoccipital.

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus
The prootic and opisthotic are fused into a single periotic
element that forms the posterior portion of the braincase,
encloses the inner ear, and contributes to the occiput (Figs.
7A, D, 8F, G, 9). The prootic portion of the periotic (hereafter prootic) is in close proximity to the ventral exit of the
pineal tube and the median ossification formed by the fused
cultriform process, presphenoid, mesethmoid, and orbitosphenoid (Figs. 7A, B, 8F, 9). A proportionally greater distance
separates these features in more basal dicynodonts, underscoring the anteroposterior shortening of the skull that has
occurred in S. parringtonii. It is unclear whether a distinct
pila antotica was present. In UMZC T1340 only a broken
surface in the area from which the pila antotica would be
expected to arise is preserved. A short, blunt projection is
present in the expected position on the right side of NMT
RB42 (Fig. 9). If this accurately reflects the original morphology of the structure, it would contrast strongly with the very
narrow, elongate pilae found in most Permian dicynodonts
and instead would be more comparable to the reduced pilae
found in many Triassic taxa (Surkov and Benton, 2004; note
that these authors coded the pila antotica as absent in Sangusaurus in their data matrix).
As preserved in NMT RB42, it appears that there was not a
distinct notch for the trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve V) posterior to the presumed pila antotica, although breakage in this area
may obscure the original morphology. Posterior to the area of
the pila antotica in NMT RB42, the lateral surface of the prootic
forms a laminar alar process, which overlies a medially directed
channel (Fig. 9). Although the alar process does not form as distinct a lamina as in the emydopoids, it is more similar to that
morphology than to the mound-like eminence present in cryptodonts and many other dicynodontoids (e.g., Kammerer et al.,
2015a; discussed as part of the dorsum sellae there). There is less
evidence for a laminar alar process and the underlying groove in
UMZC T1340, but the lateral surface of the prootic is more damaged in that specimen. A small foramen for the facial nerve (cranial nerve VII) is present near the ventral margin of the lateral
surface of the prootic; Fig. 7A, B). It is at about the same height
as the base of the quadrate ramus of the pterygoid, approximately equidistant from the base of the presumed pila antotica
dorsally and the facet surrounding the fenestra ovalis ventrally.
Dorsally, the prootic contacts the parietal and the supraoccipital
(Fig. 9).
The most prominent part of the opisthotic portion of the periotic (hereafter opisthotic) is the robust paroccipital process
(Figs. 7C, D, 8G). It resembles the paroccipital processes of
other dicynodonts in being dorsoventrally shorter medially,
expanding rapidly in height towards its lateral surface. However,
its mediolateral width is relatively short, giving it a rather blocky
appearance. The lateral surface of the process forms an articular
surface that slots into a groove on the medial side of the squamosal. This contact is marked by a vertical ridge on the occipital surface of the skull, as in many dicynodonts, but there is little
evidence of a ‘tympanic process’ (sensu Cox, 1959:326). A
slightly raised broken surface approximately in the expected
position on the left side of UMZC T1340 may represent the base
of such a process, but a corresponding feature is not evident in
NMT RB42. Medially, the opisthotic contacts the basioccipital
and seems to form part of the margin of the jugular foramen,
although the small size of the foramen and the poor preservation
of sutures make this somewhat uncertain.
The interior of the periotic portion of the braincase is prepared in UMZC T1340 and NMT RB42. The floor of this region
of the braincase, formed primarily by the basioccipital, bears a
wide, rounded ridge that is flanked by shallow grooves. The ridge
is hourglass-shaped when viewed from above, and it continues
anteriorly to the level of the pila antotica. There does not seem
to be an unossified zone (e.g., Olson, 1944; Cluver, 1971) near

207

the junction of the parabasisphenoid, basioccipital, and prootic,
although there is a slight gap between the bases of the pilae antotica that is backed by the anterior end of the ridge on the dorsal
surface of the basioccipital in NMT RB42.
Five foramina are visible on the interior wall of the periotic,
although a floccular fossa is absent. The anterior-most foramen
is oval and filled with matrix. It is located close to the level of the
anterior end of the ridge on the floor of the braincase and somewhat dorsal to the groove that flanks the median ridge. This position is consistent with its being the entrance to the canal that
transmits the facial nerve (cranial nerve VII) to the external surface of the periotic (e.g., Olson, 1944; Camp and Welles, 1956;
Cox, 1959; Cluver, 1971; Surkov and Benton, 2004; Laaß, 2015).
Posterior to the first foramen are two foramina that open into
the groove lateral to the midline ridge. Their position close to
the midpoint of the wall of the braincase suggests that they are
part of the vestibular system. Similar openings in other dicynodonts have been interpreted as ampullary recesses (e.g., Cluver,
1971) or openings for the external semicircular canal (e.g., Camp
and Welles, 1956). The fourth foramen is posterior and slightly
dorsal to the second and third. Camp and Welles (1956) suggested that a similarly positioned foramen in Placerias represented the entrance to a canal to transmit the auditory nerve
(cranial nerve VIII), but this nerve is usually reconstructed in a
more anterior position, at least in more basal dicynodonts (e.g.,
Cox, 1959; Fourie, 1993; Surkov and Benton, 2004; Castanhinha
et al., 2013; Laaß, 2015). Instead, we consider it more likely that
this represents the entrance to the jugular foramen, which also
has been considered to transmit the glossopharyngeal, vagus,
and spinal accessory nerves (cranial nerves IX, X, and XI). (e.g.,
Olson, 1944; Camp and Welles, 1956; Cox, 1959; Cluver, 1971;
Surkov and Benton, 2004; Laaß, 2015). More extensive preparation would be needed to confirm that the external expression of
the jugular foramen is confluent with this internal structure. A
seemingly blind fossa and a rounded ridge separate the fourth
foramen from the fifth, which pierces the exoccipital. As noted
above, we interpret this foramen to have transmitted the hypoglossal nerve (cranial nerve XII).
Mandible
Parts of the mandible are preserved in UMZC T1226 and
UMZC T1340. Although neither specimen is complete, together
they provide a clear picture of the mandibular morphology of S.
parringtonii (Fig. 10).
The dentary is the largest element in the mandible, and its
symphyseal portion is robustly constructed (Fig. 10D, E, G, H).
The symphyses of UMZC T1226 and UMZC T1340 are both
broken near the midline, but it seems clear that the dentaries
were fused at the symphysis, with the breaks stemming from
damage during preservation. The anterior surface of the dentary
is flat, and although it bears vascular foramina associated with
the presence of the keratinous beak, the bone lacks the extreme
rugosity seen on the external surfaces of the premaxilla and maxillae. A vertical median ridge on the anterior surface of the dentary is absent, in contrast to the morphology present in taxa such
as Placerias (Camp and Welles, 1956). The anterodorsal margin
of the symphysis forms a wedge-shaped cutting edge that is
slightly raised above the rest of the symphyseal region (best seen
in UMZC T1226; Fig. 10A, B). This morphology is similar to
that present in taxa such as Lystrosaurus or Kannemeyeria but
differs from the more strongly upturned edge seen in many
Permian taxa such as Oudenodon or the shovel-shaped symphysis characteristic of emydopoids. At the ventral edge of the symphysis, the dentary contacts the splenial.
On the dorsal surface (Fig. 10D, F, G), a midline groove
extends along the length of the dentary symphysis. Lateral to the
groove, a dentary table (sensu Angielczyk and Rubidge, 2013) is

208

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

FIGURE 10. Holotype (UMZC T1226) and referred (UMZC T1340) mandibles of Sangusaurus parringtonii. Left mandibular ramus of UMZC T1226 in
A, lateral and B, medial views. C, right mandibular ramus of UMZC T1340 in lateral view. Symphysis of UMZC T1226 in D, dorsal and E, ventral views.
F, left mandibular ramus of UMZC T 1226 in dorsal view. Symphysis of UMZC T1340 in G, dorsal and H, ventral views. Left articular of UMZC T1340 in
I, lateral and J, medial views. Lateral view of articulated left jaw joint of UMZC T1340 in K, retracted and L, protracted positions. Note that translation of
articular relative to quadrate primarily results in a vertical displacement (i.e., orthal motion) of the long axis of the mandible (represented by arrow), as
opposed to extensive palinal motion of the mandible. Abbreviations: an, angular; den, dentary; dt, dentary table; lds, lateral dentary shelf; mf, mandibular
fenestra; pds, posterior dentary sulcus; pra, prearticular; rap, retroarticular process; rfl, reflected lamina of angular; sp, splenial; sur, surangular. All scale
bars equal 2 cm. Upper scale bar applies to A–C. Middle scale bar applies to D–H. Lower left scale bar applies to I–J. Lower right scale bar applies to K–L.

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus
present on each dentary ramus. The dentary table is flat, slopes
slightly ventrolaterally, and lacks well-defined lateral and medial
walls. Posterior to the dentary table is a narrow, thin-walled posterior dentary sulcus (sensu Angielczyk and Rubidge, 2013; best
seen in UMZC T1340). A dentary pad (sensu Cox, 1998), such as
that seen in Stahleckeria or Angonisaurus, is absent. The dentary
rami diverge fairly steeply, especially in UMZC T1226, presumably to accommodate the great breadth of the occiput relative to
the length of the skull and mandible.
The lateral surface of the dentary is demarcated from the anterior surface by a strong, broadly rounded, posteroventrally curving ridge (Fig. 10A, C). The morphology of the lateral dentary
shelf is best preserved in UMZC T1340. Anteriorly, it is a
rounded swelling that grades posteriorly into a thin, ventrolaterally sloping shelf that overhangs the mandibular fenestra. Posteriorly, the dentary meets the angular along a sigmoid suture in
lateral view, and it forms part of the anterior and dorsal margins
of the mandibular fenestra, although neither specimen preserves
the fenestra in its entirety. Damage to the symphysis in UMZC
T1340 shows that the lateral surface of the dentary is quite thin,
despite the overall robust appearance of the anterior end of the
jaw. The dentary is dorsoventrally taller than the postdentary
bones in lateral view, which gives the jaw a distinct ‘chin’ near
the junction between the dentary and angular (most pronounced
in UMZC T1340; Fig. 10C), resulting in a profile similar to that
of Kitchinganomodon (e.g., see Angielczyk et al., 2014:fig. 7.7).
The large splenial is primarily exposed on the ventral and
medial surfaces of the mandible (Fig. 10A, B, E, H). As in most
dicynodonts, it is a single fused element; there is no sign of a midline suture. The medial portion of the splenial is a robust, triangular block of bone that articulates with the posterior surface of
the dentary and forms the posteroventral portion of the symphysis. Its ventral surface is heavily pitted with vascular foramina,
indicating that the keratinous beak extended onto it, and its anterior margin lacks the distinct anterior process seen in many
Permian dicynodonts. Posteriorly, the splenial bears a pair of
plate-like posterior arms that contact the angulars and contribute
to the anterior portions of the dentary rami.
The angular forms much of the ventral portion of the mandible, extending from the symphysis to the articular (Fig. 10A–I).
Anteriorly, the angular slots between the plate-like portion of
the splenial and the thin lateral side of the dentary. This section
of the angular is thickened both dorsoventrally and mediolaterally, and together with the robust central portion of the splenial
and the dentary symphysis, it contributes to the heavily built
anterior portion of the mandible. There is a sharp corner
between the anterior part of the angular and the postdentary
portion, which slightly extends the ‘chin’ at the posteroventral
end of the dentary. The postdentary section of the angular is
more gracile and forms part of the anterior and ventral margins
of the mandibular fenestra. Medial to the fenestra, the angular
forms the ventral margin of the Meckelian canal (best seen in
UMZC T1226). The posterior portion of the angular contacts
the surangular dorsally, the prearticular medially, and the articular posteriorly.
The reflected lamina of the angular is preserved in both
UMZC T1226 and UMZC T1340 (Fig. 10A, I). Its lateral surface
is smooth and convex, lacking the ornamentation of ridges and
grooves found in many more basal dicynodonts. Cruickshank
(1986a) noted that the reflected lamina contacted the lateral surface of the articular and included this in his emended diagnosis
of the genus Sangusaurus. This contact is clearly preserved in
UMZC T1340, and it seems likely to have been present in
UMZC T1226, although the reflected lamina is more poorly preserved in that specimen. Close approach or contact between the
reflected lamina and the articular is a rare feature in dicynodonts, otherwise present only in Kannemeyeria lophorhinus,
Stahleckeria, Ischigualastia, and Moghreberia (Huene, 1935;

209

Crozier, 1970; Keyser, 1974; Keyser and Cruickshank, 1979;
Dutuit, 1988).
Little of the surangular and prearticular is preserved
(Fig. 10A, B, F, J). As is typical of dicynodonts, the surangular
forms the dorsal portion of the postdentary region of the mandible. In UMZC T1340 there is a channel present in the dentary
that would accommodate the anterior portion of the surangular.
This channel extends forward into the symphyseal region of the
dentary, implying that the surangular had a large anterior section
in addition to the exposed postdentary portion of the bone, similar to the angular. The fact that the anterior portion of the surangular is not preserved in this specimen, despite relatively minor
damage to the dentary, indicates that the surangular and dentary
were not strongly fused. The prearticular is a strap-like element
present on the medial side of the mandible. It is firmly fused with
the articular, and no evidence of a suture between the bones
remains.
The morphology of the articular is shown best by UMZC
T1340 (Fig. 10I, J). In its basic construction, the articular
presents the morphology that typifies dicynodonts, and that
proved key to understanding the function of their highly derived
feeding system (e.g., Watson, 1912a, 1948; Crompton and Hotton, 1967; King et al., 1989; King, 1994; Angielczyk, 2004). The
joint surface consists of elongate, convex lateral and medial condyles that are separated by a midline trochlea, and which grade
into a concave articular recess at the anterodorsal end of the
articular. The medial articular surface is not completely preserved in UMZC T1340, but based on that specimen and UMZC
T1226, it seems clear that the lateral articular surface was the
wider of the two. The lateral edge of the lateral articular surface
is thickened, and it overhangs the posterior edge of the reflected
lamina of the angular. A short, rectangular retroarticular process
is present posterior and ventral to the articular surfaces. The
articular contacts the angular and surangular anteriorly, and the
prearticular contacts its medial surface, although the suture
between these bones is no longer visible.
Despite the overall similarity of the articular of S. parringtonii
to those of other dicynodonts, there are some noteworthy features of its arthology. Specifically, both the main articular surfaces and the articular recess slope strongly posteroventrally and
form one more or less continuous surface. This contrasts with
the morphology seen in most other dicynodonts, in which the
articular recess is more horizontal and somewhat offset from the
posteroventrally sloping articular surfaces (e.g., Crompton and
Hotton, 1967). The functional implication of this morphology is
that although translation of the articular relative to the quadrate
is still possible, the result of this translation is a primarily orthal
motion of the mandible (Fig. 10K, L) instead of the palinal
motion typical of most dicynodonts. A reemphasis on the orthal
component of jaw motion also has been suggested for Lystrosaurus and Kannemeyeria (Crompton and Hotton, 1967; Cluver,
1971; King and Cluver, 1991; Renaut, 2001).

Postcrania
Two dorsal vertebrae that include centra and partial neural
arches are preserved in NMT RB42 (Fig. 11). In addition, neural
spines of two additional vertebrae are preserved in association
with these vertebrae (Fig. 11). Although we cannot exactly
determine the positions of the vertebrae in the vertebral column,
coalescence of the rib facets, and the short, anteroposteriorly
narrow transverse processes indicate that they are posterior dorsals (King, 1981a). The general morphology of the vertebrae is
very similar to what has been described and figured for other
kannemeyeriiforms (e.g., Pearson, 1924; Huene, 1935; Camp and
Welles, 1956; Sun, 1963; Cox, 1965; Bandyopadhyay, 1988; VegaDias and Schultz, 2004; Govender et al., 2008).

210

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

FIGURE 11. Vertebrae of Sangusaurus parringtonii (NMT RB42). More anterior dorsal vertebra in A, anterior, B, left lateral, and C, posterior
views. More posterior dorsal vertebra in D, anterior, E, left lateral, and F, posterior views. Isolated neural spine in G, anterior, H, left lateral, and I,
posterior views. Articulated isolated neural spine and more posterior dorsal vertebra in J, anterior, K, left lateral, and L, posterior views. Arrows highlight the boundary between the anterior zygapophysis (on the dorsal vertebra) and the posterior zygapophysis (on the neural spine). Note the
extremely precise fit of these articular surfaces (the right posterior zygapophysis is damaged, explaining the gap between it and the corresponding
anterior zygapophysis observed in posterior view). Abbreviations: ctm, centrum; nc, neural canal; nf, nutritive foramen; pzyg, posterior zygapophysis;
rf, rib facet; spr, spinous process; tpr, transverse process. Scale bars equal 2 cm. Lower scale bar applies to A–F and J–L; upper scale bar applies to
G–I.

The centra of both vertebrae are deeply amphicoelous
(Fig. 11A, C, D, F) and they are disc-like, being transversely
wider than long. The articular surfaces of the centrum are taller
and wider than the body, giving the vertebra a waisted appearance in lateral and ventral views. An oval nutritive foramen is
present on the lateral surface of the centrum, slightly ventral to
the junction with the neural arch and posterior to the ventral
margin of the rib facet (Fig. 11B). The suture between the centrum and the neural arch is not obvious, suggesting that NMT
RB42 was an adult.
The articular surfaces for the tuberculum and capitulum of the
rib have coalesced into a single continuous surface that includes
parts of the centrum and neural arch (Fig. 11B, E). The ventral
corner of the articular surface projects laterally as a small,
rounded to triangular facet. This facet faces dorsolaterally and is
buttressed ventrally by a small ridge arising from the lateral margin of the anterior face of the centrum. From there, the articular
surface first extends dorsally and then angles posterodorsally,
continuing towards the transverse process. This portion of the
articular surface is bounded anterodorsally and posteroventrally
by raised ridges on the neural arch pedicle, giving it a channellike appearance. The posterodorsal corner of the articular surface
is located on the ventral side of the transverse process. A small
subtriangular facet is present here, which faces ventrolaterally.
The pedicles of the neural arch are robust and blocky
(Fig. 11A–F). In the better-preserved vertebra, the anterior surface of the pedicle slopes posterodorsally to meet the transverse
process, whereas the posterior surface of the pedicle is nearly
vertical. The transverse process is small and does not project far
beyond the lateral wall of the pedicle. In posterior view, the
transverse process is square, with a somewhat thickened dorsal
edge. Its ventrolateral corner forms a triangular facet that

contributes to the articular surface for the rib. The spinal canal is
subcircular in cross-section.
The prezygapophyses are large, occupying most of the anteroposterior length of the neural arch (Fig. 11D, E). The articular
surface of the prezygapophysis is horizontal near the midline,
but it curves strongly dorsally to form a near-vertical wall laterally. When the left and right sides are taken together, this morphology causes the prezygapophyses to form a ‘U’-shaped
channel into which the postzygapophyses slide. Given the size of
the prezygapophyses, the neural spine has the appearance of projecting from the posterior surface of the neural arch.
The preserved neural spines are short and are angled posterodorsally (Fig. 11B, G–I). The dorsal end of the spine is
expanded, rugose, and triangular, with the apex of the triangle
oriented anteriorly. A pair of low ridges extend up the posterior
surface of the neural spine, and they are flanked laterally by shallow grooves. The postzygapophyses arise from the base of the
neural spine. The articular surface of each postzygapophysis is
subtriangular to oval, gently concave, and faces ventrolaterally.
The dorsal rim of the articular surface overhangs the rest of the
facet and is buttressed by low ridges arising from the lateral and
posterior surfaces of the neural spine. There is an extremely precise fit between the pre- and postzygapophyses of the preserved
vertebrae (Fig. 11J–L), which allows some dorsoventral flexion
of the vertebral column but strictly prohibits any lateral bending.
Most information about the morphology of the sacrum comes
from the right innominate of NMT RB42. There were at least six
sacral vertebrae, and two lines of evidence suggest that seven
sacrals were present (Fig. 12B, G). First, the remains of six clear
sacral ribs are present on the medial surface of the right ilium in
NMT RB42, as well as a small piece of bone articulated with the
posterior end of the ilium that seems to represent part of a small

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus
seventh sacral rib. Second, the three well-preserved sacral centra
represent the fourth, fifth, and six sacrals. These vertebrae are
solidly fused together, and the sixth centrum appears to have the
anterior portion of an additional, poorly preserved vertebra

211

fused to it. The position of this potential seventh sacral is such
that if its sacral rib slanted posteriorly at an angle similar to that
seen in the preceding vertebrae, it would articulate with the ilium
where the apparent remains of the seventh sacral are located.

FIGURE 12. Pelvis of Sangusaurus parringtonii (NMT RB42). Right pelvis in A, lateral, and B, medial views. C, detail of right pelvis in medial view
to show sutures between ilium, ischium, and pubis. Left pelvis in D, lateral and E, medial views. F, right pelvis in ventral view to show details of
ischium and pubis. G, articulated pelvis in anteroventral view. Arrow highlights the lack of contact between the puboischiadic plates along the ventral
midline. H, articulated pelvis in dorsal view. Note lateral splay of the ilia. Abbreviations: ace, acetabulum; aip, anterior iliac process; be, broken edge;
il, ilium; is, ischium; mpe, likely origin of M. puboischiofemoralis externus; mpi, likely origin of M. puboischiofemoralis internus; of, obturator foramen; ms, unidentified muscle scar; pip, posterior iliac process; ptb, pubic tubercle; pu, pubis, rug, rugosity; sab, supraacetabular buttress; san, supraacetabular notch; sv, sacral vertebra; tub, tubercle. Scale bars equal 6 cm. Upper left scale bar applies to A–B and D–E; upper right scale bar applies to C
and F; lower right scale bar applies to G–H.

212

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

There is a general trend for an increase in the number of sacral
vertebrae in later-occurring, derived dicynodonts (Ray, 2006),
and kannemeyeriiform dicynodonts vary in the number of sacral
vertebrae. However, seven sacrals is an unusually high number.
For comparison, five sacrals have been reported in Shansiodon
(Yeh, 1959), Sinokannemeyeria (Sun, 1963), Ischigualastia (Cox,
1965), and Jachaleria (Ara
ujo and Gonzaga, 1980; Vega-Dias
and Schultz 2004); five to six are present in Wadiasaurus (Bandyopadhyay, 1988) and Parakannemeyeria (Sun, 1963; K.D.A.,
pers. observ. of PIN 2422/1); and six are present in Kannemeyeria
(Pearson, 1924; Cruickshank, 1975), Tetragonias (K.D.A., pers.
observ. of UMZC T754; also see Cruickshank, 1967), Dinodontosaurus (Morato, 2006; although see Cox, 1965), and Angonisaurus (K.D.A., pers. observ. of NHMUK PV R9732). Huene
(1935) reported eight sacrals in Stahleckeria, and our observations of GPIT/RE/8001 suggest that at least six to seven sacrals
were present in that taxon.
Compared with the proportions of the posterior dorsal vertebrae, the centra of the preserved sacrals are anteroposteriorly
longer and dorsoventrally shorter, giving them a more spoolshaped appearance (Fig. 12B, G). The centra are firmly fused
together, and the edges of the central faces do not flare beyond
the vertebrae to the degree seen in the posterior dorsals, giving
the sacrals a less waisted appearance. The contact between the
vertebra and sacral rib extends from about the level of the prezygapophyses dorsally onto the dorsal half of the centrum
(Fig. 12G, H). At least for the preserved posterior sacrals, the
sacral ribs only articulate with a single vertebra. The neural canal
is small and more oval than those of the posterior dorsals
(Fig. 12H).
The lateral ends of the first three sacral ribs are preserved in
articulation with the medial side of the right ilium, complete
right sacral ribs are preserved for sacrals 4–6, and what appears
to be the lateral end of a seventh sacral rib is articulated with the
posterior end of the right ilium (Fig. 12B, G). Parts of the distal
ends of sacral ribs 4–6 are present on the medial surface of the
left ilium, but they are more poorly preserved than those of the
right side. The end of the first sacral rib is spatulate and roughly
square. The dorsal and ventral edges of the lateral end flare past
the edges of the shaft, such that the rib narrows proximally. The
lateral ends of the next five (and possibly six) sacral vertebrae
(i.e., sacrals 2–6 or 7) are chevron-shaped and less flattened than
that of the first sacral rib, although the degree to which the chevron shape is developed is greater in the more anterior ribs. The
ventral edges of all of these ribs flare well past their shafts, and
they are rounded in sacrals 2–4 but squared-off in sacrals 5–6. In
contrast, only the dorsal edge of the end of sacral rib 2 flares dorsally past the shaft. The sacral ribs also show a gradient in their
angulation relative to the centra. Sacral ribs 1–3 are angled anteriorly, such that the edge of the distal end flares anteriorly past
the shaft. Sacral rib 4 extends laterally from the vertebra, and its
anterior and posterior ends are not strongly flared. Sacral ribs 5
and 6 (and possibly 7) are angled posteriorly, with their lateral
edges flaring posteriorly past the shaft. The medial ends of the
preserved fourth, fifth, and sixth sacral ribs are anteroposteriorly
flattened closest to the vertebrae (this likely represents part of
the fused transverse processes), but become more rounded in
cross-section near mid-shaft before flaring outwards and flattening at their lateral ends. A weak, posteriorly directed groove is
present at about mid-height on the posteromedial surface of the
sixth and probable seventh sacral ribs, giving the posterior edges
of these ribs a bilobed appearance in posterior view.
Although neither the right or left side is perfectly preserved,
the pelvis of NMT RB42 gives a very complete picture of the
overall pelvic morphology of S. parringtonii. The right ilium is
nearly complete; the acetabular portion of the left ilium also is
well preserved, but the left iliac blade is damaged dorsally and
posteriorly (Fig. 12A, B, D, E). The ilium consists of a fan-

shaped blade that articulates with the sacrum, a narrower neck,
and the dorsal portion of the acetabulum. The iliac blade can be
divided into an anteroposteriorly elongate anterior iliac process
and a much smaller posterior iliac process. The disparity in the
sizes of the processes is reflected in the lengths of their ventral
edges: the ventral length of the anterior iliac process is about
53% of the total length of the iliac blade, whereas the ventral
length of the posterior iliac process is ca. 17% of the total length.
The anterior iliac process gently curves ventrally, and beginning
at the level of the third sacral rib, its anterior end also splays laterally. In contrast, the triangular posterior iliac process angles
slightly dorsally when the sacrum is oriented horizontally, and it
does not curve laterally or medially. Kammerer et al. (2013)
reviewed the iliac blade shapes of kannemeyeriiforms, and comparison with their observations shows that the blade of S. parringtonii is similar to those of Kannemeyeria or Angonisaurus,
not sharply curved as in Stahleckeria or broadly rounded as in
Jachaleria or Ischigualastia.
The dorsal edge of the iliac blade is smoothly convex
(Fig. 12A, B) and does not bear the notches present in
Lystrosaurus (e.g., Watson, 1912b; Ray, 2006). The blade
itself is quite thin, although its dorsal edge is somewhat thickened at the level of the first sacral rib, presumably because
this rib attaches very close to the dorsal margin of the blade.
There is also a rugose, rounded tubercle at the anteroventral
corner of the anterior iliac process. A number of authors
have reconstructed the origin of M. iliotibialis near the anterior end of the iliac blade (King, 1981a, 1985; Li, 1983;
DeFauw, 1986; Walter, 1986; Ray and Chinsamy, 2003; Morato, 2006; Ray, 2006) and have suggested that the origin of
M. puboischiofemoralis internus was located in this region.
The hypothesized attachments for these muscles are on the
lateral surface of the ilium instead of its anterior edge, however, and typically there is not a comparable tubercle present
on the anterior margin. The presence of the tubercle may
indicate that the attachment of the muscle may have shifted
anteriorly in S. parringtonii. Alternatively, the tubercle might
represent an attachment for the iliopubic ligament (DeFauw,
1986).
The lateral surface of the iliac blade is relatively flat posteriorly, becoming gently concave more anteriorly. Two circular
nutritive foramina are present near the dorsal margin of the
blade, at the level of the first and third sacral ribs. A shallow
fossa is present above the ventral margin of the anterior iliac process, close to where it meets the neck of the ilium. The somewhat
rough preservation of the bone surface on the lateral surface of
the blade makes it difficult to delineate specific muscle scars.
Most of the lateral surface was likely occupied by M. iliofemoralis, with M. iliofibularis originating on the posterior iliac process
(King, 1981a, 1985; Li, 1983; DeFauw, 1986; Walter, 1986; Ray
and Chinsamy, 2003; Morato, 2006; Ray, 2006). The majority of
the medial surface of the iliac blade is covered by the sacral ribs,
but the anterior fifth of the blade was free of the sacrum. This
area may include one of the areas of origin of M. puboischiofemoralis internus and/or the attachment for the iliopubic ligament
(DeFauw, 1986; Ray and Chinsamy, 2003; Ray, 2006). An oval
nutritive foramen is located above the third sacral rib.
The neck of the ilium forms a short, robust pillar between the
iliac blade and the acetabulum (Fig. 12A–E). It is roughly triangular in cross-section, with the anterior end being wider than the
posterior end, and it transitions from being mediolaterally flattened where it meets the iliac blade to transversely expanded
just above the acetabulum. Breakage on the left ilium of NMT
RB42 shows that the anterior portion of the neck is solid bone,
whereas the posterior portion of the neck houses an open cavity
that extends ventrally deep to the exterior surface of the acetabulum. A slightly raised, striated rugosity is present near the center of the lateral surface of the neck. Previous workers generally

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus
have not reconstructed a distinct muscle attachment on this area
in dicynodonts, although in some cases parts of the attachment
of M. iliofemoralis are reconstructed as having extended onto
this area (e.g., DeFauw, 1986). Li’s (1983) reconstruction differs
from most others in placing the origin of M. iliotibialis on the lateral surface of the neck of the ilium.
The ventral margin of the lateral surface of the neck sweeps
laterally to form the overhanging supraacetabular buttress
(Fig. 12A, F). This buttress is most pronounced anteriorly and is
separated from the posterior portion of the dorsal acetabular
margin by a shallow supraacetabular notch (Fig. 12D). The acetabulum itself is roughly hemispherical, with the anterior portion
of the supraacetabular buttress forming an oval to subtriangular
overhang. The ilium meets the puboischiadic plate near the center of the acetabulum. Although the ilium is fused to the puboischiadic plate, remains of the sutures are visible, with the iliumpubis suture angling anterodorsally and the ilium-ischium suture
angling posterodorsally (Fig. 12D). A degree of flexibility
between the ilium and the puboischiadic plate has been suggested in some dicynodonts (Cox, 1959; Cruickshank, 1967;
King, 1981a), but the fusion of these elements would preclude
such flexibility in S. parringtonii. It is also noteworthy that the
ilium and pubischiadic plate are aligned roughly vertically, in
contrast to the stronger medial inflection of the puboischiadic
plate suggested by Fr€
obisch (2006) for Tetragonias.
The pubis is complexly shaped and forms the anterior half of
the ventral portion of the acetabulum and slightly less than half
of the puboischiadic plate (Fig. 12A–F). It is fused to the ilium
and ischium, but remains of the sutures between these elements
can still be made out. In lateral view, the pubis is triangular and
forms a short process (the pubic tubercle) that projects anteroventrally. The lateral surface of the tubercle is striated, and a
small projection is present just above the tip of the pubis. This
area typically is reconstructed as representing the origin of M.
ambiens in dicynodonts (DeFauw, 1986; Walter, 1986; Ray and
Chinsamy, 2003; Morato, 2006; Ray, 2006). The pubic margin of
the acetabulum is slightly raised, but it does not form a strong
rim or buttress.
At its anterior tip, the pubis sweeps medially and then posteriorly to form the anterior portion of the puboischiadic
plate (Fig. 12C, F, G). The curvature of the pubis causes the
anterior portion of the puboischiadic plate to project strongly
medially, and for the surfaces of the plate to face anterodorsally and posteroventrally. The posteroventrally facing surface of the plate is strongly striated and likely represents part
of the attachment for M. puboischiofemoralis externus (King,
1981a, 1981b; DeFauw, 1986; Ray, 2006). The pubic portion
of the puboischiadic plate is thickest at its anterolateral tip,
becoming progressively thinner until it meets the ischium.
The anterior and anteromedial edges of the puboischiadic
plate are highly rugose and bear numerous circular pits on
their surfaces. Two explanations for this pitting are (1) that it
represents an area for muscle or ligament attachment (e.g., it
represents part of the origination of M. ambiens or an attachment for the iliopubic and/or puboischiadic ligaments;
DeFauw, 1986), or (2) that it was covered in cartilage, possibly as part of a cartilaginous pubic symphysis. Of these two
options, we favor the latter because the ornamentation of the
bone, especially the circular pits, closely resembles that found
on cartilage-covered joint surfaces in the long bones of dicynodonts (e.g., see the description of the humerus below).
The left and right puboischiadic plates in dicynodonts are not
thought to have met at a bony symphysis along the ventral midline (see Cox, 1959, and Fr€
obisch, 2006, for reviews). When the
left and right halves of the pelvis of NMT RB42 are rearticulated
with the sacrum (Fig. 12G, H), the anterior (pubic) portions of
the puboischiadic plates approach each other relatively closely
(they are separated by about 4.5 cm, compared with 36.5 cm for

213

the length of the complete right iliac blade and an inner anteroposterior acetabular length of about 9 cm) but they do not contact. Interestingly, the most rugose and pitted portions of the
edge of the pubis face anteriorly when rearticulated instead of
medially, which may indicate that part of the cartilaginous symphysis (if present) projected anteriorly from the puboischiadic
plate. Posteriorly, the pubis surrounds the anterior half of the
oval obturator foramen. A raised, subtriangular area just below
the obturator foramen on the medial surface of the left pubis,
near its junction with the ischium, likely represents the origin of
M. puboischiofemoralis internus (e.g., King, 1981a; DeFauw,
1986; Morato, 2006)
The left ischium of NMT RB42 (Fig. 12D, E) is more complete
than the right, and our description focuses on this element. The
dorsal portion of the ischium is robust and forms the posterior
half of the ventral portion of the acetabulum. Its lateral surface
sweeps laterally to form a more strongly defined rim of the acetabulum than is the case for the pubis. It also surrounds the posterior half of the obturator foramen. Moving posteriorly, the
ischium rapidly flattens to form the fan-shaped posterior section
of the puboischiadic plate. This area of the ischium is much less
strongly curved than the pubis and forms a flat plate than faces
ventrolaterally. The plate is quite thin, and its ventral edge is
smooth. There is no evidence of a bony connection between the
ischia, nor is there strong evidence for a cartilaginous connection
(Fig. 12G, H). At its posterodorsal corner, the edge of the
ischium becomes markedly thicker. Based on the presence of a
broken edge on the medial surface of the bone, it is clear that the
puboischiadic plate had a medially inflected section that arose
from this thickened corner, similar to the morphology that has
been figured for a number of other kannemeyeriiforms (e.g.,
Pearson, 1924; Huene, 1935; Sun, 1963; Cox, 1965, 1969; Bandyopadhyay, 1988; Vega-Dias and Schultz, 2004). However, the medially inflected portion of the ischium is not preserved on either
side of NMT RB42, so we are uncertain of its exact size or shape.
Although the lateral surface of the plate likely served as the
attachment area for several muscles (e.g., M. puboischiofemoralis externus, M. adductor femoris, M. puboischiotibialis; King,
1981a; Li, 1983; DeFauw, 1986; Walter, 1986; Morato, 2006; Ray,
2006), distinct muscle scars are not readily apparent. Two potential muscle scars are visible on the medial surface of the ischium
(Fig. 12E). One is an oval area that has a somewhat lumpy bone
texture and is slightly raised above the surface of the surrounding
bone. This scar is located just above the ventral edge of the
puboischiadic plate. The second is an area located just below the
beginning of the (now broken) medially inflected portion of the
ischium, posterodorsal to the previous scar. Its texture is somewhat lumpy as well, and it is also marked by a thin, posteroventrally trending ridge. M. iliofibularis, M. ischiotrochantericus, M.
flexor tibialis externus, and M. flexor tibialis internus have been
reconstructed as attaching on this general area of the ischium
(King, 1981a, 1981b, 1985; Li, 1983; DeFauw, 1986; Ray and
Chinsamy, 2003; Morato, 2006; Ray, 2006), but the exact configuration of these muscles varies from author to author, making an
exact identification of the scars difficult.
The posterior half of the distal end of the left humerus is preserved in NMT RB42 (Fig. 13A–C). Given its fragmentary
nature, only a few details of the anatomy of the element can be
described. The preserved dorsal and ventral surfaces of the bone
are relatively flat, although the distal end of the strip of bone
that encloses the entepicondylar foramen arises from a somewhat rounded swelling on the ventral surface. The entepicondyle
is more dorsoventrally flattened and sweeps posteriorly more
strongly than is the case in most kannemeyeriiforms. Its shape in
dorsal and ventral views most closely resembles that of some
specimens of Placerias hesternus (e.g., UCMP A269/25361,
UCMP A269/32460), although it is less dorsoventrally flattened
in those specimens.

214

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

FIGURE 13. Humerus (NMT RB42) and femora (UMZC T1225) of Sangusaurus parringtonii. Left humerus in A, dorsal, B, ventral, and C, distal
views. Right femur in D, anterior, E, posterior, F, lateral, and G, medial views. Arrows indicate bite marks that are the holotype of the ichnofossil
Mandaodonites coxi Cruickshank, 1986b. Left femur in H, anterior and I, posterior views. J, right femur in proximal view. K, left and L, right femora
in distal view. Abbreviations: cap, capitulum; lc, lateral condyle; mc, medial condyle; ms, muscle scar; tc, trochanteric crest. Scale bars equal 2 cm
(A–C) and 6 cm (D–L). Upper scale bar applies to A–C, middle scale bar applies to D–I, and lower scale bar applies to J–L.

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus
Perhaps the most distinctive feature of the preserved portion
of the humerus is the capitulum. Typically in dicynodonts, the
capitulum is saddle-shaped, with a small exposure on the dorsal
surface of the distal humerus and a larger exposure on the ventral surface. In contrast, the capitulum of S. parringtonii is much
flatter and faces almost exclusively distally, with no parts of the
articular surface extending onto the dorsal or ventral surfaces of
the humerus (Fig. 13A–C). On the dorsal surface, the capitulum
is strongly set off from the rest of the distal end of the bone by a
shallow groove and its own thickened, strongly flared edge. The
ventral surface of the capitulum is more continuous with the rest
of the bone, although it still is strongly flared, with a distinct
edge demarcating the articular surface. The articular surface
bears a number of prominent round pits, which indicates the
likely presence of a thick cartilaginous cap in life.
A complete right femur and a left femur that is missing its
proximal end (both UMZC T1225) were collected by Nowack in
association with the holotype of S. parringtonii (Fig. 13D–L).
The right femur has a series of tooth marks that extend from just
below the femoral head to the mid-shaft region (most prominent
on the posterior surface), which Cruickshank (1986b) described
as the holotype of the ichnofossil Mandaodonites coxi (Fig. 13D,
E). His description includes drawings of the anterior and posterior surfaces of the right femur, but he focused on the bite marks
and did not describe the femora. Likewise, Cruickshank (1986a)
noted that the holotypic skull was associated with postcranial
material, but he did not specify what that material constituted.
Our description focuses on the right femur; the left closely
resembles it in all salient features. Both femora experienced
extensive cracking and mild crushing during preservation, and
the articular surfaces bear tool marks from preparation.
Cruickshank’s (1986b) description of the bite marks is quite
detailed, and we will not consider them further here.
As is typical for most dicynodonts, the general morphology of
the femur is much more consistent with an upright posture than
is the case for the forelimb. The head of the femur is subcircular,
convex anteroposteriorly, and flattened mediolaterally
(Fig. 13D–G, J). This gives it a somewhat flattened appearance
that resembles that figured for Ischigualastia by Cox (1965),
instead of the more spherical femoral heads of taxa such as Placerias, Parakannemeyeria dolichocephala, or Stahleckeria
(Huene, 1935; Camp and Welles, 1956, Sun, 1963; Kammerer
et al., 2013; Kammerer et al., 2018). The head protrudes only
slightly above the rest of the proximal surface of the femur,
mostly as a result of the rest of the proximal end sloping ventrolaterally away from the head. It is offset on the anteroposterior
axis of the bone such that it overhangs the anterior surface more
strongly than the posterior surface. The articular surface of the
head faces dorsomedially. Many authors reconstruct an attachment for M. puboischiofemoralis internus on the medial surface
of the femur just distal to the femoral head (King, 1981a, 1981b;
Li, 1983; DeFauw, 1986; Walter, 1986; Ray and Chinsamy, 2003;
Morato 2006; Ray, 2006). A distinct muscle scar in this area is
not apparent in UMZC T1225, but the bone has undergone
extensive postmortem cracking in this area, potentially obscuring
the presence of a scar. Lateral to the head, the proximal end of
the femur narrows before widening again at the lateral corner.
The proximal end of the insertion of M. puboischiofemoralis
externus likely began near the waist of the proximal edge and
extended distally onto the posterior surface of the femur (King,
1981a, 1981b, 1985; Walter, 1986; Ray and Chinsamy, 2003; Morato 2006, Ray, 2006). Li’s (1983) and DeFauw’s (1986) reconstructions of the insertion of this muscle differ from those of
most other authors because they hypothesized that the attachment was limited to the posterior surface of the femur.
The trochanteric crest is prominent, parallels the long axis of
the femur, and has a relatively straight lateral edge in anterior
view (Fig. 13D–F). Two well-developed muscle scars are present

215

on the crest. The first of these occupies the lateral corner of the
proximal end of the femur and it is oriented obliquely, such that
its long axis trends from anterolateral to posteromedial. The
anterior edge of the scar is nearly flush with the anterior surface
of the diaphysis, but its posterior edge overhangs the posterior
surface of the diaphysis. Like the humeral head, the surface of
this scar bears many small tool marks from preparation. M.
ischiotrochantericus and a portion of M. iliofemoralis are most
commonly reconstructed as attaching in this area (King, 1981a,
1981b, 1985; Li, 1983; DeFauw, 1986; Walter, 1986; Ray and
Chinsamy, 2003; Morato, 2006; Ray, 2006), although Morato
(2006) also included an insertion for M. caudifemoralis
on the equivalent of the posterior surface of this scar in
Dinodontosaurus. Unfortunately, the tool marks covering much
of this area make it impossible to differentiate distinct attachments for these muscles. The second muscle scar is located more
distally on the trochanteric crest, and it is separated from the first
by a shallow fossa in which the bone texture is smooth. The bone
in this region has undergone some crushing, but the fossa seems
to be a real feature even when this is taken into account. The second muscle scar has the form of a rugosity extending down the
lateral surface of the trochanteric crest. It is weakly curved,
trending from posterodorsal to anteroventral. The trochanteric
crest of dicynodonts has been reconstructed as representing the
insertion site of M. iliofemoralis (King, 1981a, 1981b, 1985; Li,
1983; DeFauw, 1986; Walter, 1986; Ray and Chinsamy, 2003;
Morato, 2006; Ray, 2006), with most authors hypothesizing the
differentiation of this muscle into two to three bodies. In addition to the possibility of part of M. iliofemoralis attaching to the
more proximal scar, the fact that the more distal scar can be
divided into a more rounded proximal portion and more ridgelike distal portion may reflect differentiation of the muscle as
well.
The mid-shaft region of the diaphysis is narrow compared
with the expanded proximal and distal ends of the femur and
is oval in cross-section (Fig. 13D, E, H, I). The bone in this
region of both femora has undergone extensive postmortem
cracking, which obscures surface details. The femur shows a
weak sigmoid curvature in lateral view, although this might
be exaggerated slightly by crushing and breakage in the midshaft region.
The distal end of the femur is transversely expanded
(Fig. 13D–I). In anterior view, the lateral condyle is more flared
than the medial condyle, but overall the distal end is roughly
symmetrical. The medial surface of the distal end is more or less
flat, although there is a rounded, slightly raised muscle scar at
the anterodistal corner of the surface. DeFauw (1986) proposed
reconstructing the origin of M. flexor digitorum communis from
the medial surface of the femur, although in a somewhat more
posterior position than the location of this scar. King (1981a)
proposed an attachment for the medial ligament to the tibia in a
similar position in Dicynodon huenei (D. trigonocephalus in that
paper; see Kammerer et al., 2011), although she described the
surface features of the bone as a rugose, striated band as opposed
to the scar observed in NMT RB42. The lateral surface bears a
weak, rounded ridge along its approximate midline. It arises
near the level where the distal end starts to flare laterally, and it
extends to the edge of the articular surface, curving slightly posterodistally. The ridge likely represents the origin of M. extensor
digitorum longus (King, 1981a; DeFauw, 1986; Walter, 1986;
Morato, 2006). The anterior surface of the distal end is relatively
flat and lacks the smooth semilunar surface described in Dicynodontoides (King, 1985). A distinct fossa is present on the posterior surface between the articular condyles. It is suboval in
shape, with the proximal end being slightly wider than the distal
end. Similar structures in other dicynodonts are typically considered to represent the origin of M. gastrocnemius (King, 1981a,
1981b; DeFauw, 1986; Walter, 1986; Ray and Chinsamy, 2003;

216

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

Ray, 2006), usually with the assumption that it had not yet
divided into two heads.
The articular surfaces of the lateral and medial condyles are
contiguous, and they present the same surface texture and tool
marks visible on the femoral head (Fig. 13K, L). The anterior
edge of the articular surface is flush with the anterior surface of
the femur, but the posterior portion of the articular surface
encroaches on the posterior surface of the bone. In distal view,
the lateral condyle is subhemispherical in shape. The medial condyle is less convex and anteroposteriorly longer, but mediolaterally narrower.
PHYLOGENETIC ANALYSIS
Methods
As noted above, Sangusaurus has been included in several previous phylogenetic analyses (Maisch, 2001; Surkov and Benton,
2004; Kammerer et al., 2011, 2013, 2015b; Castaninha et al.,
2013; Angielczyk and Cox, 2015; Cox and Angielczyk, 2015;
Angielczyk et al., 2016; Boos et al., 2016). The codings used in
these analyses relied almost exclusively on the specimens of S.
parringtonii housed at the UMZC, although a limited amount of
data (primarily codings for the pelvis) from NMT RB42 were
included in analyses based on the data set of Kammerer et al.
(2011) (i.e., Castaninha et al., 2013; Kammerer et al., 2013,
2015b; Angielczyk and Cox, 2015; Cox and Angielczyk, 2015;
Angielczyk et al., 2016; Boos et al., 2016). Our detailed redescription of Sangusaurus, especially considering new information
available in NMT RB42, revealed some characters that were
coded incorrectly in previous analyses, as well as a number of
characters that could be coded for the first time. These new
observations facilitate a reappraisal of the phylogenetic relationships of Sangusaurus, which is important considering the persistent disagreement found in the literature about the placement of
the taxon within Kannemeyeriiformes. Because of the highly
fragmentary nature of the only specimen of S. edentatus, we did
not attempt to include that species in our analysis. Instead, our
coding is specifically for S. parringtonii and incorporates observations from all known specimens of the species.
Our data set is based on that of Angielczyk and Kammerer
(2018), which in turn is a modified version of the data set presented in Cox and Angielczyk (2015) and Angielczyk et al.
(2016). Angielczyk and Kammerer (2018) modified and recoded
several characters found in previous versions of their data set,
and a complete description of those changes can be found in that
paper. We generated a new coding for S. parringtonii, which is
substantially more complete than in previous iterations of the
data set (22% missing data for discrete-state characters and 39%
missing data for continuous characters for S. parringtonii in the
current data set compared with 41% and 67%, respectively, in
the data set of Cox and Angielczyk, 2015). We also added a small
number of new measurements to the data set underlying the continuous character codings and removed two duplicate measurements, which caused minor changes to the codings for
Cistecephalus, Colobodectes, Dicynodon huenei, Dicynodontoides, Diictodon, Lystrosaurus curvatus, Odontocyclops, Oudenodon, Pristerodon, Rhinodicynodon, Stahleckeria, Tetragonias,
and Tropidostoma. A complete list of characters, a copy of the
data matrix, and data used for coding the continuous characters
are available in Supplemental Data.
The final data set included 100 operational taxonomic units
(OTUs) and 194 characters. One hundred seventy-one of these
characters were discrete binary or multistate characters. Of
these, seven characters were ordered (see character list in Supplemental Data) and 164 were treated as unordered. All discrete-state characters were weighted equally. The remaining 23
characters were continuous. We treated the continuous characters as additive using the method of Goloboff et al. (2006) and

used mean values as the codings for the OTUs except in cases
when only a single measurement was available for an OTU.
Unknown and inapplicable discrete-state and continuous characters were coded as ‘?’ (Strong and Lipscomb, 2000).
We analyzed the data set using TNT 1.1 (October 2010 version) (Goloboff et al., 2008), and two search strategies were
employed. The first search used the new technology methods of
TNT. We employed a driven search with the initial search level
set at 65, which was checked every three hits. The initial number
of addition sequence replicates was 500, and the search was
required to find the trees of shortest length 20 times. The analysis started with default settings for sectorial searching, tree drifting, parsimony ratchet, and tree fusing. In the second analysis,
we used the traditional search method of tree bisection reconnection (TBR) branch swapping with 10,000 replicates and 10
trees held per replicate. Biarmosuchus served as the outgroup to
root the most parsimonious cladograms from both analyses.
We utilized symmetric resampling (Goloboff et al., 2003),
jackknife analysis (Mueller and Ayala, 1982; Farris et al., 1996),
and decay analysis (Bremer, 1988, 1994) to measure support for
the most parsimonious cladograms. The symmetric resampling
results are based on 10,000 replicates; each replicate included a
new technology search with default settings for tree drifting, parsimony ratchet, and tree fusing and 10 random addition sequence
replicates. Absolute frequency values were used to summarize
the results (Kopuchian and Ramırez, 2010). Recent research
(e.g., Kopuchian and Ramırez, 2010; Simmons and Freudenstein,
2011) suggests that jackknife-based resampling approaches produce fewer spurious groups than bootstrap-based methods, so we
also conducted a jackknife analysis as an additional measure of
clade support. We utilized 10,000 resampling replicates, with a
36% probability of character removal, and the same search
parameters as for the symmetric resampling analysis. The decay
analysis results are based on a sample of 954,314 suboptimal cladograms with lengths up to six steps longer than the most parsimonious cladograms. Following the recommendations of
Goloboff et al. (2008), the suboptimal trees were generated
through a series of traditional searches in which the length of
suboptimal cladograms retained, as well as the number of suboptimal cladograms, were incrementally increased. The resulting
cladograms were filtered to remove duplicates before the decay
analysis, so the 954,314 cladograms in the sample are all unique.
Finally, a 50% majority-rule consensus of the 954,314 cladograms was calculated to gain insight into how frequently the
clades recovered in the most parsimonious cladograms are represented in suboptimal trees.
As noted above, hypotheses regarding the relationships of
Sangusaurus have varied, although analyses based on the data
matrix of Kammerer et al. (2011) have consistently recovered it
as a stahleckeriid. To compare the results of our phylogenetic
analysis with prior hypotheses, we conducted a series of seven
constrained analyses (see Supplemental Data for the topologies
of the constraint tees). Two of the constraint trees are based on
the cladograms resulting from the computerized cladistic analyses of Maisch (2001) and Surkov and Benton (2004). The third
and fourth constraint trees are based on the classifications and
hand-drawn cladograms of King (1988) and Cox (1998). The final
three constraint trees are based on the non-cladistic classifications of Cox (1965; as modified by Cox [1969], with the inclusion
of Zambiasaurus in Stahleckeriidae and Sangusaurus in Kannemeyeriidae), Keyser and Cruickshank (1979), and Cox and Li
(1983). Together, the constrained topologies of these analyses
cover both specific hypotheses of relationships for Sangusaurus
that have been put forward in the past and provide insight into
how the taxon might have fit into previous classifications in
which it was considered to be incertae sedis (i.e., Cox and Li,
1983; King, 1988). We ran the constrained tree searches using
the same starting parameters as the primary new technology

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus
search described above. For the Cox (1965/1969), Keyser and
Cruickshank (1979), Cox and Li (1983), King (1988), and Cox
(1998) analyses, taxa that were considered incertae sedis or that
were not included as distinct OTUs were treated as ‘floaters’
(Angonisaurus, Dolichuranus, Eubrachiosaurus, Jachaleria, Kannemeyeria lophorhinus, Moghreberia, Rabidosaurus, Rechnisaurus, Rhadiodromus, Rhinodicynodon, Shaanbeikannemeyeria,
Uralokannemeyeria, Vinceria, Wadiasaurus, and Xiyukannemeyeria for Cox, 1965/1969; Angonisaurus, Eubrachiosaurus,
Moghreberia, and Xiyukannemeyeria for Keyser and Crucikshank, 1979; Rhadiodromus, Rechnisaurus, Sangusaurus, and
Xiyukannemeyeria for Cox and Li, 1983; Eubrachiosaurus,
Jachaleria, Rechnisaurus, Sangusaurus, and Xiyukannemeyeria
for King, 1988; Dolichuranus, Eubrachiosaurus, Moghreberia,
Rhadiodromus, Shaanbeikannemeyria, and Xiyukannemeyeria
for Cox, 1998).
Results
A single most parsimonious cladogram was recovered by both
the new technology and traditional searches (length D 1105.904
steps, consistency index [CI] D 0.247, retention index [RI] D
0.719). Topological results are shown in Figure 14. The topology
shows a mixture of similarities to and differences from other
recent analyses of anomodont phylogeny. For example, among
non-dicynodont anomodonts, Venyukovioidea occupies a more
rootward position and Anomocephaloidea a more derived position than in the analyses of Angielczyk et al. (2016) and Boos
et al. (2016). The topology for non-bidental dicynodonts is more
similar to that of Angielczyk et al. (2016) and Boos et al. (2016)
than Cox and Angielczyk (2015) in the separation of pylaecephalids and emydopoids, and it particularly resembles the tree of
Boos et al. (2016) in its paraphyly of Cryptodontia, although the
arrangement of taxa within this grade is somewhat different. The
most important differences in the context of the current study
involve the topology of Kannemeyeriiformes. Prior analyses
with various versions of the Kammerer et al. (2011) data set
recovered a rough three-fold division of Kannemeyeriiformes,
with a monophyletic Shansiodontidae being the sister group of
the rest of the clade and a paraphyletic assemblage of
‘kannemeyeriids’ on the stem leading to Stahleckeriidae (e.g.,
Castanhinha et al., 2013; Kammerer et al., 2013, 2015b; Cox and
Angielczyk, 2015; Angielczyk et al., 2016). In the present analysis, the ‘core shansiodontids’ Rhinodicynodon, Shansiodon, Vinceria, and Tetragonias form a grade at the base of
Kannemeyeriiformes, with the rest of the group divided into kannemeyeriid and stahleckeriid subclades.
Within this framework, Sangusaurus parringtonii is reconstructed as a stahleckeriid, specifically the sister taxon of
Stahleckeria itself. Two discrete-state synapomorphies support the sister-group relationship between Sangusaurus and
Stahleckeria: postorbitals extend the entire length of the temporal bar (discrete-state character 52, state 0); and intertuberal ridge present (discrete-state character 103, state 1). It is
also supported by the relative position of the pineal foramen
on the skull roof (continuous character 6), although missing
data for this character within Stahleckeriidae makes its value
somewhat uncertain. The clade Stahleckeriidae (sensu Kammerer et al., 2013) is supported by five discrete-state synapomorphies: ventral edge of the caniniform process or dorsal
edge of the erupted tusk anterior to the anterior orbital
margin (discrete-state character 32, state 0); interparietal
makes a large contribution to the intertemporal skull roof
(discrete-state character 57, state 2); pronounced pila antotica
absent and trigeminal notch is a horizontal hollow in the
anterior edge of the periotic (discrete-state character 95, state
1); angular with anterolateral trough for the dentary present
(discrete-state character 134, state 1); and anterior edge of

217

scapula extended laterally to form a strong crest (discretestate character 145, state 1). Missing data for characters 95
and 134 among the stahleckeriids makes the value of these
synapomorphies uncertain. The larger clade Stahleckeriidae
C Angonisaurus C Dinodontosaurus is supported by three
discrete-state synapomoprhies: ventral surface of the median
pterygoid plate smooth and flat (discrete-state character 92,
state 1); number of sacral vertebrae six or more (discretestate character 142, state 3); and insertion of M. latissimus
dorsi at rugose tuberosity on the posteroventral surface of
humerus (discrete-state character 152, state 0). The value of
character 92 as a synapomorphy is somewhat uncertain due
to missing data and variation within the clade, and reversals
occur within some stahleckeriid species for the other two
characters. Three continuous characters also support this
clade: length of the interpterygoid vacuity relative to basal
length of skull (continuous character 10); ratio of minimum
width of the scapula to maximum width of the dorsal end of
the scapula (continuous character 17); and ratio of anterior
iliac process length to acetabulum diameter (continuous character 21). Missing data and variation within the clade make
the true value of these characters as diagnostic features
uncertain, however.
The results of the symmetric resampling, jackknife, and decay
analyses indicate that the most parsimonious cladogram is
weakly supported (Fig. 14; Supplemental Data), a widespread
problem in phylogenetic analyses of anomodonts (e.g., see Cox
and Angielczyk, 2015, and Angielczyk et al., 2016, for recent
examples). Regarding the relationships of Sangusaurus, it is
important to note that its sister-group relationship with Stahleckeria, the monophyly of Stahleckeriidae, and the monophyly
of the clade including Stahleckeriidae, Dinodontosaurus, and
Angonisaurus all receive poor branch support even compared
with other nodes in the current phylogeny. Nevertheless, the
most parsimonious cladograms from the constrained analyses
ranged from 12.106 to 31.882 steps longer than the preferred
cladogram from the primary analysis (see Supplemental Data for
the cladograms resulting from the constrained analyses), indicating that the alternative hypotheses of kannemeyeriiform relationships fit the current data set comparatively poorly. It is also
telling that in the constrained analyses in which the position of
Sangusaurus was allowed to float (i.e., the constrained analyses
based on Cox and Li, 1983, and King, 1988), it was recovered
within clades essentially equivalent to the Stahleckeriidae of the
current analysis.
FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF THE FEEDING SYSTEM
OF SANGUSAURUS PARRINGTONII
Methods
The skull and mandible of Sangusaurus are highly distinctive
(Fig. 15), and many of their features (large, deep snout; short
temporal bar; tall, broad occiput; posteroventrally sloping articular surface of the articular) have implications for the positioning
of the jaw adductor musculature and the range of motion of the
mandible. To investigate the function of the feeding system, we
conducted a lever mechanics analysis and calculated the mechanical advantage of S. parringtonii and three other dicynodonts that
have more typical skull morphologies.
Because there is no complete skull with associated mandible
known for S. parringtonii, our analysis is based on information
from three specimens. We used NMT RB42 for the skull because
it is the most complete and undistorted skull that is known. The
mandible we used is a composite reconstruction based on
UMZC T1226 and UMZC T1340, which we scaled to the appropriate size for NMT RB42. Neither of these mandibles is complete, but together they provide a good overview of the jaw
morphology of S. parringtonii. Our first comparative specimen is

218

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

FIGURE 14. Most parsimonious cladogram from the phylogenetic analysis. Scores: 1105.904 steps, consistency index D 0.247, retention index D
0.719. Numbers at nodes represent decay index (left/top), symmetric resampling (middle), and the percentage of the 954,314 suboptimal trees in which
the node is resolved (right/bottom). Results of the jackknife analysis are similar to those of the symmetric resampling analysis and are presented in
Supplementary Data.

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

FIGURE 15. Reconstructions of the skull and mandible of Sangusaurus
parringtonii. Skull in A, dorsal, B, ventral, and C, left lateral views. Mandible in D, left lateral view. Abbreviations: an, angular; apr, anterior palatal ridge; ar, articular; bo, basioccipital; den, dentary; eo, exoccipital;
epi, epipterygoid; fo, fenestra ovalis; fr, frontal; icf, internal carotid foramen; ip, interparietal; ipv, interpterygoid vacuity; ju, jugal; la, lacrimal; lf,
labial fossa; mf, mandibular fenestra; mx, maxilla; na, nasal; pa, parietal;
pab, parabasisphenoid; pal, palatine; per, periotic; pf, prefrontal; pif,
pineal foramen; pmx, premaxilla; po, postorbital; pp, preparietal; ppr
posterior palatal ridge; pt, pterygoid; qd, quadrate; qj, quadratojugal;
smx, septomaxilla; sp, splenial; sq, squamosal; sur surangular; vo, vomer.

219

BP/1/3927, a specimen of Daptocephalus leoniceps that consists
of a very well-preserved skull and mandible that was described
in detail by Ewer (1961). We chose to use D. leoniceps in the
analysis because it is a large, basal dicynodontoid (e.g., Kammerer et al., 2011; Castanhinha et al., 2013; Cox and Angielczyk,
2015) and as such is a reasonable model of the ancestral morphotype from which kannemeyeriiforms evolved. The second comparative specimen is SAM-PK-3017. This specimen is the
holotype of Kannemeyeria erithrea Haughton, 1915, which is
now recognized as a junior synonym of K. simocephalus (Cruickshank, 1970; King, 1988; Renaut, 2000), and consists of a nearly
undeformed skull and mandible. Kannemeyeria is a good example of a generalized kannemeyeriiform, and it shows some modifications to the skull and mandible that suggest that it its feeding
system emphasized a more orthal movement of the jaw than is
the case for most Permian dicynodonts (Renaut, 2000, 2001).
The third comparative specimen is GPIT/RE/7107, an articulated skull that is the lectotype of Stahleckeria potens (see
Maisch, 2001), which is inferred to be the sister taxon of Sangusaurus. Stahleckeria shows some similarities to Sangusaurus in its
overall skull morphology, such as a proportionally long snout
and short temporal region, a broad occipital plate, and relatively
vertical squamosal fossa, although its morphology is not taken to
the extremes seen in Sangusaurus (e.g., the snout is not telescoped and the lateral margin of the squamosal does not curve
anteriorly as strongly). Specimen GPIT/RE/7107 was mounted
with a mandible that includes a relatively complete dentary, but
the postdentary bones are mostly reconstructed. The reconstruction is closely based on the more complete mandible figured by
Huene (1935) (part of the mounted skeleton GPIT/RE/7106),
and the proportions of the mandible seem to be approximately
correct for the skull, so we used it in our functional analysis of
Stahleckeria.
Our quantitative analysis focused on the lines of action and
lever arm mechanics, as has been performed for various fossil
vertebrates (e.g., Ostrom, 1964; Crompton and Hotton, 1967;
DeMar and Barghusen, 1972; Tanoue et al., 2009; Sakamoto,
2010; Mallon and Anderson, 2015; Nabavizadeh, 2016). We performed these analyses on two muscles: M. adductor mandibulae
externus medialis (mAMEM) and M. adductor mandibulae
externus lateralis (mAMEL). Using lateral views of the skull and
mandible that had been scaled to the same size and superimposed such that the jaw was positioned in a closed-mouth orientation, we mapped the origins and insertions of mAMEM and
mAMEL with Photoshop, based on muscle scarring and attachment sites that had been proposed in the literature (Watson,
1948; Crompton and Hotton, 1967; Cluver, 1975; Barghusen,
1976; King, 1981a; King et al., 1989; Ray, 2000; Renaut, 2001;
Maisch, 2003). We then calculated the centroid of the origins
and insertions of both mAMEM and mAMEL using ImageJ,
which were added to the images with the mapped attachment
areas. We quantified muscular lines of action as the angle of the
connection between the origin and insertion centroids of each
muscle. Following that step, we used lever arm mechanical
advantage methodologies to analyze the mechanical advantage
(MA) of mAMEM and mAMEL, as well as the resultant angle
of both muscle vectors combined. The distance from the jaw
joint to the perpendicular intersection of the muscle vector analyzed measures the input lever, or moment arm. The distance
from the jaw joint to the bite point (i.e., distal tip of the beak)
measures the output lever. Because there are no data for physiological cross-sectional area of the muscles in the fossil record, we
simplified the muscle body size to a unit of 1 for both muscles,
creating a simple input/output lever equation to find MA, or relative bite force, across the four species.
In addition to considering the function of the jaw muscles, we
also calculated the occipital indices of Surkov and Benton
(2008). These indices reflect the relative effectiveness of the

220

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

lateral and dorsal portions of the neck musculature and have
been inferred to provide insight into the preferred plane of head
movement and feeding level of dicynodont species. Only NMT
RB42 is complete enough for the required measurements to be
taken, and our analysis focuses on this specimen. We were able
to measure skull height (H) and skull length along the palatal
midline (Lcr) directly from the specimen. We estimated width
across the squamosals (Wsq) in two steps. First, we rearticulated
the left squamosal and measured the distance from its lateral
edge to the midpoint of the occipital condyle. Then we multiplied the resulting value by 2 to obtain the total width of the
occiput.
Results
Our quantitative results show that Sangusaurus parringtonii
possesses lower adductor angles (mAMEM D 56.31 ; mAMEL
D 43.37 ) (Fig. 16) than its sister species Stahleckeria potens
(mAMEM D 72.32 ; mAMEL D 47.90 ), and higher adductor
angles than Kannemeyeria simocephalus (mAMEM D 51.48 ;
mAMEL D 33.45 ). Daptocephalus leoniceps possesses a comparatively higher mAMEM angle ( D 68.32 ) and a lower
mAMEL angle ( D 41.38 ).
In Sangusaurus parringtonii, the MA of both mAMEM ( D
0.286) and mAMEL ( D 0.351) (Fig. 16) were mid-range compared with the lower values in Kannemeyeria simocephalus
(mAMEM D 0.223; mAMEL D 0.218) and higher values in Daptocephalus leoniceps (mAMEM D 0.369; mAMEL D 0.368).
Stahleckeria potens possesses a slightly lower mAMEM MA
(D 0.270) and a substantially lower mAMEL MA ( D 0.230)
compared with Sangusaurus parringtonii. However, the values
for these two taxa are more similar to each other than either
taxon is to Kannemeyeria or Daptocephalus.
The skull height (H) of NMT RB42 is 205.7 mm, and its length
along the palatal midline (Lcr) is 334.0 mm. We estimated the
width across the squamosals (Wsq) as 512.0 mm. Based on these
values, the dorsal index (Idor) is 0.616 and the lateral index (Ilat)
is 0.767. These values result in an occipital index (OI) of 0.151.

FIGURE 16. Reconstruction of the two major jaw adductor muscles of
Sangusaurus parringtonii. Upper number is the adductor angle for the
muscle in question; lower number is the mechanical advantage (MA).
Abbreviations: mAMEL, M. adductor mandibulae externus lateralis;
mAMEM, M. adductor mandibulae externus medialis.

DISCUSSION
Taxonomy of Sangusaurus
Sangusaurus has a comparatively simple taxonomic history for
a dicynodont. Only two species have been described, and there
have not been revisions of those species or attempts to synonymize the genus with other kannemeyeriiform taxa. However,
three taxonomic questions require attention: (1) is there adequate evidence to refer the species parringtonii Cruickshank,
1986a, to the genus Sangusaurus; (2) do S. edentatus and S. parringtonii represent distinct species; and (3) what is the significance of variation observed within the known sample of S.
parringtonii?
The only known specimen of S. edentatus is very fragmentary,
and it does not preserve the portions of the skull and mandible
that include the most striking diagnostic characters in the specimens of S. parringtonii. Taken individually, none of the characters that unite S. edentatus and S. parringtonii is unique to the
genus Sangusaurus. However, the combination of characters
shared between S. edentatus and S. parringtonii seems to be
unique among kannemeyeriiforms, arguing that there is a sound
basis for uniting the species within the same genus. Perhaps the
most compelling diagnostic character for Sangusaurus is the
postpineal boss (Figs. 3H, 6A, B). A somewhat similar boss was
reported in Rechnisaurus (Roy-Chowdhury, 1970; Bandyopadhyay, 1989), but there the boss is wider than in either species of
Sangusaurus, taking up nearly the entire width of the dorsal surface of the intertemporal bar (flat areas of the parietals flank the
boss in Sangusaurus), and it arises at the posterior edge of the
pineal foramen (the boss in Sangusaurus arises a short distance
behind the foramen). Other kannemeyeriiforms lack a comparable boss. Based on these observations, we consider it most conservative to retain S. edentatus and S. parringtonii in the genus
Sangusaurus, but we acknowledge that the support for this
arrangement ideally should be stronger.
Given the close proximity of the Ruhuhu Basin and the northern Luangwa Basin now and in the Triassic, it is surprising to
have a different species of a single large dicynodont genus in
each basin. This is particularly the case considering the more cosmopolitan distribution of roughly contemporaneous southern
Gondwanan dicynodonts such as Stahleckeria potens (Huene,
1935; Abdala et al., 2013), Kannemeyeria simocephalus (Cruickshank, 1965, 1970; Renaut, 2000), K. lophorhinus (Crozier, 1970;
Keyser, 1973; Keyser and Cruickshank, 1979; Renaut, 2000;
Renaut et al., 2003), and potentially Angonisaurus cruickshanki
(Cox and Li, 1983; Hancox et al., 2013; Sidor et al., 2014) and
Dolichuranus primaevus (Keyser, 1973; Kammerer et al., 2018;
Smith et al., 2018). The small sample size available for Sangusaurus (a total of four specimens) makes an assessment of interspecific variation challenging. Nevertheless, there do appear to be
some consistent differences between the Tanzanian and Zambian specimens. The most obvious of these differences is the
very strong development of the lateral caniniform buttress in all
three Tanzanian specimens (Figs. 6, 7A, B, 8A, B) and the
absence of this feature in the Zambian specimen (Fig. 3E–G).
The parietal portion of the intertemporal bar also is proportionally narrower in the two Tanzanian specimens that preserve it
(Fig. 7A, B, 8C), despite the specimens being deformed differently (dorsoventral compression in UMZC T1226, lateral compression/shear in NMT RB42), and the shape of the parietalinterparietal suture varies between the Tanzanian and Zambian
specimens (Figs. 3H, 7A, B, 8C). Some of the unusual characters
of S. parringtonii, such as the extremely prominent crest on the
snout and telescoping of the skull, also may be autapomorphies
of the species, but the holotype of S. edentatus is not preserved in
a manner that allows these characters to be assessed. Even
though the number of comparisons that can be made between
the Tanzanian and Zambian specimens is limited, we think it is

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus
justified to retain both S. edentatus and S. parringtonii as distinct
species at this time because the specimens from each basin are
diagnosably different.
It is important to reiterate that both of these areas of
uncertainty stem from the very incomplete nature of the
holotype of S. edentatus. The available specimens of S. parringtonii show clearly that it is a unique morphotype among
dicynodonts (Figs. 1, 15), and there is no reason to doubt its
validity. It may be possible to extend aspects of this distinctive morphology to the genus Sangusaurus as a whole, or to
show that S. parringtonii actually is a synonym of S. edentatus, or even that S. edentatus Cox, 1969, and S. parringtonii
Cruickshank, 1986a, are not closely related and could be
assigned to different genera. The key to answering these
questions will be the discovery of better-preserved material
of S. edentatus in Zambia that can be more fully compared
with the specimens of S. parringtonii.
Finally, despite the fact that all three skulls of S. parringtonii
are close to the same size and apparently represent adult individuals, some differences among the specimens are apparent. When
UMZC T1226 and NMT RB42 are compared, for example, the
former specimen has a less prominent nasal crest, narrower
exposure of the parietals on the dorsal surface of the intertemporal bar, and it lacks a postpineal boss (Figs. 6A, B, 7A, B, 8A, C).
Likewise, the ventral margin of the mandibular ramus has a
more gently curving profile in UMZC T1226 than in UMZC
T1340, which has a more distinct ‘chin’ (Fig. 10A, C). Most of
these differences concern ornamental features, and although
some might have been affected by preservation (e.g., the dorsal
surface of the snout is more poorly preserved in UMZC T1226
than NMT RB42), others almost certainly are real (e.g., the dentaries of UMZC T1226 and UMZC T1340 have well-preserved
ventral margins). Intraspecific variation in skull ornamentation
in dicynodonts previously has been hypothesized to stem from
sexual differences (e.g., Tollman et al., 1980; Sullivan et al.,
2003; Kammerer et al., 2015a), so it is tempting to speculate that
it may be indicative of sexual dimorphism in S. parringtonii as
well. Given our experience collecting dicynodonts in the Manda
Beds, and working with museum specimens from the unit, we are
uncertain whether there will ever be enough material of S. parringtonii to quantitatively test whether the species was sexually
dimorphic. The discovery of even a small number of additional
specimens might be enough to test whether some of the patterns
of variation we observed in the known skulls are consistent (e.g.,
whether a less prominent snout ridge is always associated with
the absence of a postpineal boss and/or a ‘chin’ on the mandibular ramus), though, so it is important to keep this possibility in
mind should more individuals come to light.
Phylogenetic Relationships of Sangusaurus
The position of Sangusaurus within the classification and phylogeny of kannemeyeriiform dicynodonts has remained poorly
constrained, largely on account of the highly incomplete nature
of the holotype of S. edentatus and the very limited amount of
information available in the literature about S. parringtonii.
Since the analysis of Kammerer et al. (2011), all phylogenetic
analyses that included Sangusaurus have been permutations of
that data set. Those analyses have been consistent in placing Sangusaurus within Stahleckeriidae, although its exact position
within the clade is somewhat variable. The codings for Sangusaurus in the various versions of the Kammerer et al. (2011) data set
were based nearly entirely on observations of UMZC T1226 and
UMZC T1340, although pelvis characters were coded based on
NMT RB42. The current analysis expands upon this work by
including a completely revised coding based on all available
material for S. parringtonii (NMT RB42, UMZC T1225, UMZC
T1226, and UMZC T1340), including parts of these specimens

221

that were not considered previously. The results of the analysis
including this new coding corroborate the hypothesis that Sangusaurus is a stahleckeriid and suggest that it is the sister taxon of
Stahleckeria. Branch support for both of these results is weak
(Fig. 14), but five discrete-state synapomorphies provide evidence of the former relationship and two support the latter (see
above). This topology also is notably more parsimonious in the
context of the current data set than the alternative placements of
Sangusaurus that we examined. The stahleckeriid status of Sangusaurus echoes Cooper’s (1980) placement of the genus in that
family (based primarily on its lack of tusks), but it differs from
most other papers that have attempted to address its relationships. Therefore, some consideration of the data supporting the
alternative hypotheses is necessary.
Cox (1969) was the first to discuss the relationships of Sangusaurus, and he did this in the context of his broader work on the
morphology, taxonomy, and phylogeny of Triassic dicynodonts
(Cox, 1965). The division of kannemeyeriiforms into two subgroups, the Stahleckeriidae and Kannemeyeriidae, in Cox (1965)
primarily was based on the idea that kannemeyeriids had relatively narrow snouts, longer temporal openings, posterodorsally
angled intertemporal bars, and relatively tall occiputs, whereas
stahleckeriids had wider snouts, shorter temporal openings, and
wider occiputs. In this framework, Cox (1969) concluded that S.
edentatus was a kannemeyeriid because the snout seemed relatively narrow and the anteroventral slope of the occipital surface
of the interparietal led him to believe that the intertemporal bar
was angled posterodorsally. He also noted that S. edentatus
appeared to have a median ridge on the snout, like many other
kannemeyeriids in his classification, and that the structure of the
intertemporal bar was similar to Ischigualastia, which he also
considered a kannemeyeriid. In the time since Cox’s (1969)
paper, the importance and interpretation of many of these characters have been challenged. For example, older reports tended
to exaggerate the width of the snout in Stahleckeria, a midline
ridge on the snout is present in Stahleckeria, and the structure of
the temporal bar of Ischigualastia (particularly the large contribution of the interparietal to the skull roof) has been recognized
as being more similar to that of Stahleckeria than to those of taxa
such as Kannemeyeria (e.g., Keyser and Cruickshank, 1979;
Maisch, 2001). Specimens of Sangusaurus parringtonii also reveal
new information about the morphology of Sangusaurus that
likely would have affected Cox’s (1969) interpretation of the
taxon’s relationships. Specifically, the occiput is very wide, similar to Stahleckeria, and the anterior slope of the occipital portion
of the interparietal reflects the fact that the posterior end of the
intertemporal bar extends posteriorly past the level of the occipital plate, not posterodorsal angulation of the intertemporal bar.
Despite these problems, most subsequent treatments of Sangusaurus persisted in assuming a close relationship between Sangusaurus and the kannemeyeriids (sensu Cox, 1965), usually with
little discussion of the characters supporting this assignment
(Roy-Chowdhury, 1970; Keyser and Cruickshank, 1979; Keyser
and Brink in Brink, 1982; Cox, 1991, 1998).
In his description of Sangusaurus parringtonii, Cruickshank
(1986a) also posited that Sangusaurus was a kannemeyeriid, and
his reasoning was based on similarities (presence of postpineal
boss, groove on the dorsal surface of the intertemporal bar, close
approach or contact of the reflected lamina of the angular and
the lateral surface of the articular) to the taxon he referred to as
Kannemeyeria cristarhynchus. This is problematic because
Cruickshank’s (1986a) concept of K. crystarhynchus has since
been shown to be a chimera consisting of material belonging to
Rechnisaurus cristarhynchus from India and K. lophorhinus from
southern Africa (Bandyopadhyay, 1989; Renaut, 2000; Renaut
et al., 2003). Rechnisaurus does possess a postpineal boss, but its
morphology differs from that of Sangusaurus (see above). Furthermore, if the cranial anatomy of S. parringtonii is typical of

222

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

the genus as a whole, a number of other features differentiate it
from Rechnisaurus, including a different morphology of the
snout ridge, presence of a boss anterior to the pineal foramen,
telescoped skull, and more horizontal intertemporal bar. The
reflected lamina of the angular does closely approach the articular in K. lophorhinus (a mandible is not known in Rechnisaurus),
but this character state also is present in stahleckeriids such as
Stahleckeria (Huene, 1935) and Ischigualastia (Keyser, 1974).
Similarly, the skull of Sangusaurus minimally differs from that of
K. lophorhinus in the presence of a postpineal boss and the
larger contribution of the interparietal to the dorsal surface of
the skull roof, and many other characters would differentiate the
taxa if the morphology of S. parringtonii is representative of the
genus as whole. Because of these issues, we do not find
Cruickshank’s (1986a) argument for the kannemeyeriid status of
Sangusaurus to be convincing.
Maisch (2001) presented the first computerized cladistic
analysis of kannemeyeriiform phylogeny, and his topology
differed in important ways from most previous treatments of
the group. Sangusaurus was recovered as the sister taxon of
Rechnisaurus within a clade (Dinodontosauridae) consisting
of a mixture of taxa from Cox’s (1965) Kannemeyeriidae and
Stahleckeriidae, as well as taxa that had not yet been
described at the time of Cox’s paper. Important in the context of previous classifications, Kannemeyeria, Stahleckeria,
and Ischigualastia all fell in clades outside of Dinodontosauridae. The characters supporting Dinodontosauridae in
Maisch’s (2001) analysis include short postorbital skull
length, temporal fenestrae less than one-third the length of
the skull, snout longer than the postorbital portion of the
skull, caniniform process large, and occipital width equal to
or greater than the length of the skull. Characters supporting
a close relationship with Rechnisaurus (i.e., Rechnisaurinae
of Maisch, 2001) include strongly developed snout ridge and
wide exposure of the caniniform processes lateral to the skull
roof in dorsal view. Although we agree with many of the
basic observations incorporated into Maisch’s (2001) data
matrix, we have greater confidence in the results of our analysis for four reasons. First, several of the characters listed
above have similar or identical counterparts in our matrix,
but our data matrix also incorporates a large number of additional characters not considered by Maisch (2001), including
some that are recovered as synapomorphies of Stahleckeriidae, including Sangusaurus (e.g., tip of caniniform process
anterior to anterior orbital margin; reduction of the pila antotica). Second, given the difference in the morphology of the
snout ridge in Sangusaurus and Rechnisaurus (see above), we
are skeptical as to whether it represents a homologous character state in these taxa. Third, Maisch’s (2001) topology
requires several seemingly significant characters (e.g., absence
of tusks, large contribution of the interparietal to the skull
roof, close approach of the reflected lamina and the articular,
the distinctive shape of the quadrate and its articulation with
the squamosal) to have evolved independently in Sangusaurus and Stahleckeria, and his cladogram is notably less parsimonious in the context of our data set (22.051 steps longer
than our most parsimonious cladogram). Finally, although
the low branch support for our most parsimonious cladogram
means that we cannot completely reject Maisch’s (2001)
topology, we do note that the position of Sangusaurus within
Stahleckeriidae has been a consistent result in all analyses of
derivatives of the Kammerer et al. (2011) data set, despite
variation among these analyses in other aspects of the
inferred relationships of Kannemeyeriiformes.
Surkov and Benton (2004) suggested a close relationship
between Sangusaurus, Uralokannemeyeria, kannemeyeria, and
Rechnisaurus. One synapomorphy in their data set supports this
topology, a reversal to a single foramen for the entrance of the

internal carotids into the sella turcica. According to their codings, Sangusaurus differs in this character from the other putative
stahleckeriids and their close relatives that are included in the
data set (i.e., Stahleckeria, Placerias, Angonisaurus). However,
they also recorded the presence of the derived state (paired
foramina for the internal carotids) in taxa that we recover as part
of Kannemeyeriidae (Rhadiodromus, Uralokannemeyeria) or at
the base of Kannemeyeriiformes (Shansiodon). This raises questions about the phylogenetic utility of the character, and assessment of this character in a wider range of dicynodonts will be
necessary to address the issue.
At a broader scale of the relationships of all kannemeyeriiforms, our analysis differs from previous permutations of the
Kammerer et al. (2011) data set in recovering a non-monophyletic ‘core’ Shansiodontidae (i.e., Shansiodon, Tetragonias, Vinceria, Rhinodicynodon), a monophyletic Kannemeyeriidae, and
the placement of Dinodontosaurus and Angonisaurus on the
stem leading to Stahleckeriidae. The synapomorphies supporting
the latter relationship were noted above in our description of the
results of the phylogenetic analysis. However, the character support for the other changes warrants discussion as well.
Although a monophyletic Shansiodontidae has been a consistent feature of previous versions of the Kammerer et al. (2011)
data set, it typically had low branch support statistics and was
supported by a small number of discrete-state synapomorphies.
For example, in the analysis of Cox and Angielczyk (2015), the
clade was diagnosed by two discrete-state synapomorphies: five
sacral vertebrae (character 124, state 2 of that data set) and femoral head offset dorsally from the proximal end of the femur
(character 147, state 1 of that data set). In the current data set,
five sacral vertebrae likely represents the primitive condition for
Kannemeyeriiformes as a whole, although it is unclear whether
it is a synapomorphy for the clade because missing data for
Rhinodicynodon and several non-kannemeyeriiform dicynodontoids results in ambiguous ancestral state reconstructions around
this node. An offset femoral head is reconstructed as a kannemeyeriiform synapomorphy, with reversals in Dinodontosaurus
and Kannemeyeriidae. Branch support is still low, though, and
the most parsimonious cladograms that include a monophyletic
‘core’ Shansiodontidae are only 1.303 steps longer than our overall most parsimonious cladograms (see Supplemental Data for
constraint tree used in this analysis and the most parsimonious
cladogram resulting from it). Because of these facts, we consider
the question of shansiodontid monophyly to be in need of further
investigation.
Kannemeyeriidae sensu lato formed a paraphyletic grade
between Shansiodontidae and Stahleckeriidae in all analyses of
previous versions of the Kammerer et al. (2011) data set except
Angielczyk and Cox (2015), although support values along the
backbone of the grade were low. In the current version of the
data set, the branch subtending Kannemeyeriidae (here Shaanbeikannemeyeria, Wadiasaurus, and all descendants of their most
recent common ancestor) is one of the most strongly supported
within Kannemeyeriiformes (although support is still low in a
global sense), and it is diagnosed by four discrete-state synapomorphies: ventral edge of the caniniform process anterior to
anterior orbital margin (character 32, state 0); temporal portion
of skull roof angled dorsally (character 44, state 1); postorbitals
extend the entire length of the intertemporal bar (character 52,
state 0); and basioccipital tubera elongate, nearly quadrangular,
with tubera extremely close together (character 101, state 2).
Assuming this topology is correct, it implies an important biogeographic dichotomy in Triassic dicynodont evolution, with
kannemeyeriids being a predominantly Laurasian radiation and
stahleckeriids and their closest relatives being a primarily Gondwanan clade. Based on generally accepted terrestrial biostratigraphic correlations for the Triassic (e.g., Lucas, 2010),
stahleckeriids were relatively slow to disperse out of Gondwana,

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus
with only Late Triassic representatives such as Placerias or
Eubrachiosaurus in Laurasia (e.g., Kammerer et al., 2018). Kannemeyeriids, on the other hand, quickly dispersed into the southern contents, with taxa such as Kannemeyeria and Dolichuranus
reaching southern Africa by early in the Middle Triassic.
Functional Morphology of the Feeding System
Numerous studies have explored the feeding mechanism of
dicynodonts, which is characterized by a highly derived craniomandibular anatomy adapted for a strictly herbivorous diet
(Watson, 1948; Crompton and Hotton, 1967; Cluver, 1970, 1975;
Barghusen, 1976; King, 1981a; King et al., 1989; Cox, 1998; Ray,
2000; Renaut, 2001; Maisch, 2003; Jasinoski et al., 2009; Cox and
Angielczyk, 2015). Rostrally extending jaw adductor musculature and a sloped, rostrocaudally sliding quadrate-articular joint
allow for the strong palinal (i.e., caudally directed) feeding
stroke characteristic of a majority of dicynodont taxa (Crompton
and Hotton, 1967). Among extinct vertebrates, palinal feeding is
also especially prevalent in various ornithischian dinosaur clades
and is suggested to have been a key foundational adaptation for
their successful herbivorous lifestyles (Mallon and Anderson,
2014; Nabavizadeh and Weishampel, 2016). The preceding
Permo-Triassic radiation of palinal feeding dicynodont taxa
seems to have achieved similar success (although Angielczyk,
2004, questioned whether the palinal feeding system was the sole
feature underlying their radiation). Interestingly, a secondary
transition to a primarily orthal feeding mechanism has been suggested in the predominantly Triassic lystrosaurids and kannemeyeriiforms (Crompton and Hotton, 1967; Cluver, 1971; King
and Cluver, 1991; Renaut, 2001). Because Sangusaurus is a stahleckeriid kannemeyeriiform, we expect to see adaptations for a
secondarily more orthal feeding mechanism in this taxon as well,
and these adaptations are explored below.
The distinctively large, dorsoventrally deep snout and tall,
transversely broadened occiput of S. parringtonii suggest relatively powerful bite strength compared with most other dicynodont taxa. Rugosities on the external surface of the premaxilla,
the maxilla, and the dentary, created by attachment of the keratinous rhamphothecal sheath, are extremely prominent and deep,
suggesting the likelihood of large forces from feeding causing
remodeling of the bone beneath the rhamphotheca. Cutting
ridges are present running longitudinally along the inner margins
of the beak and on the secondary palate, which also were covered by the keratinous rhamphotheca and used for shearing vegetation in a primarily orthal feeding stroke, with slight palinal
movement.
The mandible also is visibly built to resist powerful bite forces.
The rostral extent of the dentary is dorsoventrally deepened at
the symphysis (particularly in UMZC T1340), for higher mesial
force resistance in orthal feeding, and prominent rugosities
showing rhamphothecal attachment are further indicators of
this. The articular surface of the articular slopes strongly caudoventrally, which is also indicative of a primarily orthal feeding
motion, because translation of the articular relative to the quadrate results in the mandible moving dorsally during occlusion.
The oral margin along the longitudinal dorsal rim of the dentary
is transversely expanded bilaterally and would have been exaggerated by the keratinous sheath. The transversely broadened
oral margin suggests possible dissipation of force in a transverse
component of feeding as well.
Transverse feeding motions occasionally have been proposed
in dicynodonts (Watson, 1948; Cluver, 1974b; Keyser, 1975; Ray,
2000; Cox and Angielczyk, 2015). These suggestions often were
based on inferred movements at the quadrate-articular joint, but
the presence of a kinetic joint between the dentary and postdentary bones, allowing potential flexibility around a dorsoventral
axis for transverse motion, also has been proposed (Cox and

223

Angielczyk, 2015). Likewise, even though it is usually portrayed
as a change associated with the evolution of palinal jaw movement (e.g., King et al., 1989), the reduction of the transverse
flange of the pterygoid in dicynodonts also would have removed
a prominent bony stop preventing transverse jaw movements
that was present in most other nonmammalian synapsids.
Although we do not have preserved wear data from a keratinous
sheath or tusk wear facets, it is necessary to consider the possibility of transverse feeding in light of the highly distinctive cranial
anatomy of S. parringtonii.
In lateral view, the temporal bar is rostrocaudally shorter relative to the snout compared with the other dicynodont taxa we
considered in the analysis of jaw mechanics, restricting the caudal expansion of mAMEM origination along its lateral aspect.
The muscle also likely attached to the medial surface of the zygomatic arch (i.e., medial to the lateral adductor fossa of the squamosal), and the temporal fenestra is large and subcircular in
shape, providing a large space for adductor muscle attachment.
The mAMEM extends rostroventrally to attach along the dorsal
margin of the surangular. This insertion point creates a larger
adductor vector angle for mAMEM and results in a more vertical
contraction of the muscle that would have aided in orthal
feeding.
One of the most striking characteristics of the skull of Sangusaurus is the highly exaggerated laterally flaring adductor fossa
on the squamosal for the lateral origin of mAMEL muscle fibers,
with the muscle then extending rostroventrally to insert on the
lateral dentary shelf. Typically, the dicynodont adductor fossa
extends caudally without significant lateral projection, resulting
in a muscular arrangement optimized for a directly caudally oriented palinal motion. The adductor fossa of Sangusaurus is
strongly verticalized and uniquely expanded laterally, which
reorients the adductor vector to pull the mandible in both an
orthal as well as a lateral (transverse) motion. A slight palinal
component is also likely, due to the minimally caudodorsal orientation of muscle fibers in lateral view; however, this is less
important in Sangusaurus than in more typical dicynodonts that
strongly emphasize a palinal jaw movement.
As mentioned above, the MA values for both mAMEM and
mAMEL in Sangusaurus were mid-range and most closely
resembled those calculated for its sister taxon Stahleckeria, as
opposed to the lower values in Kannemeyeria and higher values
of Daptocephalus. Interestingly, although Kannemeyeria and the
stahleckeriids we examined appear to have emphasized an orthal
movement of the mandible, they achieved this goal in different
ways. For example, Sangusaurus has higher adductor angles,
which lower MA values, whereas Kannemeyeria has rostrally displaced insertions of mAMEL that substantially lower MA values
as well. Even though Stahleckeria has somewhat different overall
adductor muscle angles, its MA values are similar to those of
Sangusaurus. This similarity is not surprising given the close relationship of these taxa, but the more transversely widened occiput
in Sangusaurus suggests a change in feeding motion to a more
transverse power stroke compared with Stahleckeria.
The M. pterygoideus (mPT) in dicynodonts is commonly suggested to largely aid in orthal feeding (Crompton and Hotton,
1967), and this is the case in Sangusaurus. The mPT originates
along the lateral aspect of the characteristic ‘X’-shaped pterygoids. Its muscle body has been hypothesized to insert on the
medial surface of the posterior portion of the mandible and/or to
extend ventrally to wrap ventrolaterally around the angular and
attach caudal to the reflected lamina or on the lateral surface of
the reflected lamina (e.g., Crompton and Hotton, 1967; Barghusen, 1976; King et al., 1989). Because the postorbital region of the
cranium is rostrocaudally shortened and the postdentary elements
are shortened relative to the length of the dentary, the resulting
vector angle of mPT would have been relatively vertical and well
suited for a primarily orthal power stroke. The slightly rostral

224

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

orientation of muscle fibers would have also contributed to the
return of the jaw to normal position before the next power stroke.
Lastly, M. depressor mandibulae (mDM) is the primary muscle
acting in opening the jaw, pulling the retroarticular process dorsally when contracted caudal to the mandible.
Taking all of these characteristics of the Sangusaurus skull into
account, we propose a feeding mechanism consisting of a primarily orthal power stroke of the oral cavity, with slight palinal
motion in tandem, followed by transverse motion of the dentary
aided by a lateral pulling vector of the dorsolaterally oriented
mAMEL. This form of feeding is unique among most dicynodont
taxa and could represent a novel means for dicynodonts to exploit
altered vegetation following the Permo-Triassic extinction.
Among the Triassic dicynodonts included in Surkov and
Benton’s (2008) data set, the occipital index value for NMT
RB42 (0.151) is closest to Kannemeyeria (0.13), Rhadiodromus
(0.12), and Angonisaurus (0.123) but is less than the value for
Stahleckeria (0.26). Our calculated value for Sangusaurus indicates that it was an intermediate-level feeder in Surkov and
Benton’s (2008) classification of Triassic dicynodonts, and that
lateral movements of the head were more important in feeding
than vertical movements. The somewhat higher occipital index
for Stahleckeria implies that it fed at a lower level with greater
emphasis on lateral movements than Sangusaurus. This divergence parallels the difference observed in the adductor angle
and mechanical advantage results for the two taxa and suggests
that minor differences in ecology existed between them despite
their apparently close phylogenetic relationship.
Biostratigraphic Significance of Sangusaurus
Despite being a relatively obscure taxon, Sangusaurus has
been used in two ways in Triassic terrestrial biostratigraphy in
southern and eastern Africa. First, beginning with the initial
description of S. edentatus (Cox, 1969), its presence in the upper
Ntawere Formation along with Zambiasaurus has been used to
argue that this part of the formation preserves a fauna that is
temporally separated from that of the lower Ntawere Formation
(characterized by the presence of Kannemeyeria lophorhinus
and ‘Kannemeyeria’ latirostris). Second, the discovery of Sangusaurus in the Ruhuhu Basin led to its being used as an index fossil to correlate the Manda Beds with the upper Ntawere
Formation (Cruickshank, 1986a; Cox, 1991; Battail, 1993; Abdala
and Sa-Teixeira, 2004; Fr€
obisch, 2009; Angielczyk et al., 2014;
Peecook et al., 2018).
The idea that the presence of Sangusaurus indicates rocks
postdating the stratigraphic range of Kannemeyeria (i.e., roughly
equivalent to subzone B of the Cynognathus Assemblage Zone
in the main Karoo Basin) probably is correct. Not only does Sangusaurus occur in strata above those that have produced Kannemeyeria in the Luangwa Basin, but this is also the case in the
Ruhuhu Basin. Sangusaurus parringtonii occurs in the mid-toupper Lifua Member of the Manda Beds. This places it well
above the reported occurrence of Kannemeyeria in the underlying Kingori Sandstone Member (Cruickshank, 1965), and also
above a recently discovered fossiliferous horizon in the lower
Lifua Member that includes the dicynodont Dolichuranus (Kammerer et al., 2018; Nesbitt et al., 2017; Smith et al., 2018), a taxon
that co-occurs with K. lophorhinus in the Upper Omingonde
Formation of Namibia (e.g., Keyser, 1973; Fr€
obisch, 2009). Generally, both the upper Ntawere and mid-to-upper Lifua Member
have been considered to be Anisian to early Ladinian in age
(e.g., Lucas, 1998, 2010; Abdala et al., 2005, 2013). This hypothesis may be incorrect, however, given recent radiometric dates for
South American rock units previously thought to be Middle Triassic on the basis of tetrapod biostratigraphy (Ottone et al.,
2014; Marsicano et al., 2016), and we caution against the assumption that the presence of Sangusaurus indicates an Anisian or

Ladinian age until the absolute ages of the Ntawere Formation
and the Lifua Member are better constrained. The use of Sangusaurus as an index fossil to correlate the Lifua Member and the
Ntawere Formation also is somewhat questionable on account of
the very fragmentary nature of S. edentatus. Discovery of betterpreserved material of S. edentatus, allowing confirmation that
the genus Sangusaurus as currently composed is valid, will be
needed to confirm its biostratigraphic utility.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank C. Saanane (University of Dar es Salaam) and A.
Taibaijuka, L. Nampunju, and M. Salehe (Department of Antiquities, Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism) for assistance
in arranging and carrying out field work in the Ruhuhu Basin. M.
Abdalla, S. Nesbitt, C. Sidor, W. Simpson, R. Smith, J.-S. Steyer,
M. Stocker, N. Tabor, and L. Tsuji also made numerous contributions to the field work and subsequent research. Field work in
Tanzania was supported by National Geographic Society grants
7787–05 (to C. Sidor), 8962–11 (to C. Sidor), and 9606–14 (to S.
Nesbitt), with additional support from NSF DBI-0306158 (to K.
D.A.), NSF EAR-1337291 (to K.D.A.), NSF EAR-1337569 (to
C. Sidor), and The Grainger Foundation (to K.D.A.). C. van
Beek prepared NMT RB42. M. Donnelly drafted the drawings in
Figures 1, 6, 7, and 15. C. Mateke (ZLS) and M. Lowe and the
late Ray Symonds (both UMZC) provided access to specimens
of Sangusaurus. C. Vega, R. Irmis, and an anonymous reviewer
provided helpful suggestions that improved the manuscript. We
dedicate this paper to the memory of Arthur R. I. Cruickshank
(1932–2011), in recognition of his work on the Triassic dicynodonts of the Ruhuhu Basin. Arthur began a more detailed
description of Sangusaurus parringtonii with one of us (P.J.H.),
but the manuscript was never completed. We hope he would
approve of the current contribution.
LITERATURE CITED
Abdala, F., and A. M. Sa-Teixeira. 2004. A traversodontid cynodont of
African affinity in the South American Triassic. Palaeontologia africana 40:11–22.
Abdala, F., P. J. Hancox, and J. Neveling. 2005. Cynodonts from the
uppermost Burgersdorp Formation, South Africa, and their bearing
on the biostratigraphy and correlation of the Triassic Cynognathus
Assemblage Zone. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 25:192–199.
Abdala, F., C. A. Marsicano, R. M. H. Smith, and R. Swart. 2013.
Strengthening western Gondwanan correlations: a Brazilian dicynodont (Synapsida, Anomodontia) in the Middle Triassic of Namibia.
Gondwana Research 23:1151–1162.
Angielczyk, K. D. 2002. Redescription, phylogenetic position, and stratigraphic significance of the dicynodont genus Odontocyclops (Synapsida: Anomodontia). Journal of Paleontology 76:1047–1059.
Angielczyk, K. D. 2004. Phylogenetic evidence for and implications of a
dual origin of propaliny in anomodont therapsids (Synapsida).
Paleobiology 30:268–296.
Angielczyk, K. D., and C. B. Cox. 2015. Distinctive emydopoid dicynodont (Therapsida, Anomodontia) mandibles from the Permian
Ruhuhu and Usili formations (Songea Group), Ruhuhu Basin, Tanzania. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology. doi: 10.1080/
02724634.2015.1008699.
Angielczyk, K. D., and C. F. Kammerer. 2017. The cranial morphology,
phylogenetic position, and biogeography of the upper Permian
dicynodont Compsodon helmoedi van Hoepen (Therapsida, Anomodontia). Papers in Palaeontology 3:513–545.
Angielczyk, K. D., and A. A. Kurkin. 2003. Phylogenetic analysis of Russian Permian dicynodonts (Therapsida: Anomodontia): implications
for Permian biostratigraphy and Pangaean biogeography. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 139:157–212.
Angielczyk, K. D., and B. S. Rubidge. 2009. The Permian dicynodont
Colobodectes cluveri (Therapsida, Anomodontia), with notes on its
ontogeny and stratigraphic range in the Karoo Basin, South Africa.
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 29:1162–1173.

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus
Angielczyk, K. D., and B. S. Rubidge. 2013. Skeletal morphology, phylogenetic relationships, and stratigraphic range of Eosimops newtoni
Broom, 1921, a pylaecephalid dicynodont (Therapsida, Anomodontia) from the middle Permian of South Africa. Journal of Systematic
Palaeontology 11:191–231.
Angielczyk, K. D., B. S. Rubidge, M. O. Day, and F. Lin. 2016. A reevaluation of Brachyprosopus broomi and Chelydontops altidentalis,
dicynodonts (Therapsida, Anomodontia) from the middle Permian
Tapinocephalus Assemblage Zone of the Karoo Basin, South
Africa. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology. doi: 10.1080/
02724634.2016.1078342.
Angielczyk, K. D., J.-S. Steyer, C. A. Sidor, R. M. H. Smith, R. L. Whatley, and S. Tolan. 2014. Permian and Triassic dicynodont (Therapsida: Anomodontia) faunas of the Luangwa Basin, Zambia:
taxonomic update and implications for dicynodont biogeography
and biostratigraphy; pp. 93–138 in C. F. Kammerer, K. D. Angielczyk, and J. Fr€
obisch (eds.), Early Evolutionary History of the Synapsida. Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Ara
ujo, D. C., and Gonzaga, T. D. 1980. Uma nova especie de
Jachaleria (Therapsida, Dicynodontia) do Triassico do Brasil;
pp. 159–174 in Actas Del Congreso Argentino de Paleontologıa
y Biostratigrafıa y Primer Congreso Latinoamericano de Paleontologıa Tomo I.
Bandyopadhyay, S. 1988. A kannemeyeriid dicynodont from the Middle
Triassic Yerrapalli Formation. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London Series B 320:185–233.
Bandyopadhyay, S. 1989. The mammal-like reptile Rechnisaurus from
the Triassic of India. Palaeontology 32:305–312.
Barbolini, N., M. K. Bamford, and S. Tolan. 2016. Permo-Triassic palynology and palaeobotany of Zambia: a review. Palaeontologia africana 50:18–30.
Barghusen, H. R. 1976. Notes on the adductor jaw musculature of Venjukovia, a primitive anomodont therapsid from the Permian of the
U.S.S.R. Annals of the South African Museum 69:249–260.
Battail, B. 1993. On the biostratigraphy of Triassic therapsid-bearing formations; pp. 31–35 in S. G. Lucas, and M. Morales (eds.), The Nonmarine Triassic. New Mexico Museum of Natural History and
Science Bulletin 3.
Boos, A. D. S., C. F. Kammerer, C. L. Schultz, M. B. Soares, and A. L. R.
Ilha. 2016. A new dicynodont (Therapsida: Anomodontia)
from the Permian of southern Brazil and its implications for bidentalian origins. PLoS ONE 11:e0155000. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0155000.
Bremer, K. 1988. The limits of amino acid sequence data in angiosperm
phylogenetic reconstruction. Evolution 42:795–803.
Bremer, K. 1994. Branch support and tree stability. Cladistics 10:295–304.
Brink, A. S. 1982. Illustrated bibliographical catalogue of the Synapsida.
Geological Survey of South Africa Handbook 10.
Broom, R. 1905. On the use of the term Anomodontia. Albany Museum
Records 1:266–269.
Camp, C. L. 1956. Triassic dicynodont reptiles. Part II. Triassic dicynodonts
compared. Memoirs of the University of California 13:305–341.
Camp, C. L., and S. P. Welles. 1956. Triassic dicynodont reptiles. Part I.
The North American genus Placerias. Memoirs of the University of
California 13:255–304.
Castanhinha, R., R. Ara
ujo, L. C. J
unior, K. D. Angielczyk, G. G.
Martins, R. M. S. Martins, C. Chaouiya, F. Backmann, and F.
Wilde. 2013. Bringing dicynodonts back to life: paleobiology
and anatomy of a new emydopoid genus from the Upper Permian of Mozambique. PLoS ONE 8:e80974. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0080974.
Cluver, M. A. 1970. The palate and mandible in some specimens of Dicynodon testudirostris Broom and Haughton (Reptilia, Therapsida).
Annals of the South African Museum 56:133–153.
Cluver, M. A. 1971. The cranial morphology of the dicynodont genus
Lystrosaurus. Annals of the South African Museum 56:155–274.
Cluver, M. A. 1974a. The cranial morphology of the Lower Triassic
dicynodont Myosaurus gracilis. Annals of the South African
Museum 66:35–54.
Cluver, M. A. 1974b. The skull and mandible of a new cistecephalid
dicynodont. Annals of the South African Museum 64:137–155.
Cluver, M. A. 1975. A new dicynodont reptile from the Tapinocephalus
Zone (Karoo System, Beaufort Series) of South Africa, with evidence of the jaw adductor musculature. Annals of the South African
Museum 67:7–23.

225

Cluver, M. A., and G. M. King. 1983. A reassessment of the relationships of
Permian Dicynodontia (Reptilia, Therapsida) and a new classification
of dicynodonts. Annals of the South African Museum 91:191–273.
Cooper, M. R. 1980. “The origins and classifications of Triassic
dicynodonts” by A. W. Keyser, and A. R. I. Cruickshank. Discussion. Transactions of the Geological Society of South Africa
83:107–110.
Cox, C. B. 1959. On the anatomy of a new dicynodont genus with evidence of the position of the tympanum. Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London 132:321–367.
Cox, C. B. 1965. New Triassic dicynodonts from South America, their origins and relationships. Philosophical Transactions of the royal Society Series B 248:457–514.
Cox, C. B. 1968. The Cha~
nares (Argentina) Triassic reptile fauna. IV.
The dicynodont fauna. Breviora 295:1–27.
Cox, C. B. 1969. Two new dicynodonts from the Triassic Ntawere Formation, Zambia. Bulletin of the British Museum (Natural History),
Geology 17:255–294.
Cox, C. B. 1991. The Pangaea dicynodont Rechnisaurus and the comparative biostratigraphy of Triassic dicynodont faunas. Palaeontology
34:767–784.
Cox, C. B. 1998. The jaw function and adaptive radiation of the dicynodont mammal-like reptiles of the Karoo Basin of South Africa. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 122:349–384.
Cox, C. B., and K. D. Angielczyk. 2015. A new endothiodont dicynodont
(Therapsida, Anomodontia) from the Permian Ruhuhu Formation
(Songea Group) of Tanzania and its feeding system. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology. doi: 10.1080/02724634.2014.935388.
Cox, C. B., and J.-L. Li. 1983. A new genus of Triassic dicynodont from
East Africa and its classification. Palaeontology 26:389–406.
Crompton, A. W., and N. Hotton, III. 1967. Functional morphology of
the masticatory apparatus of two dicynodonts (Reptilia, Therapsida). Postilla 109:1–51.
Crozier, E. A. 1970. Preliminary report on two Triassic dicynodonts from
Zambia. Palaeontologia africana 13:39–45.
Cruickshank, A. R. I. 1965. On a specimen of the anomodont reptile
Kannemeyeria latifrons (Broom) from the Manda Formation of
Tanganyika, Tanzania. Proceedings of the Linnean Society of London 176:149–157.
Cruickshank, A. R. I. 1967. A new dicynodont genus from the Manda Formation of Tanzania (Tanganyika). Journal of Zoology 153:163–208.
Cruickshank, A. R. I. 1970. Taxonomy of the Triassic anomodont genus
Kannemeyeria. Palaeontologia africana 13:47–55.
Cruickshank, A. R. I. 1975. The skeleton of the Triassic anomodont Kannemeyeria wilsoni Broom. Palaeontologia africana 18:137–142.
Cruickshank, A. R. I. 1986a. Biostratigraphy and classification of a new
Triassic dicynodont from east Africa. Modern Geology 10:121–131.
Cruickshank, A. R. I. 1986b. Archosaur predation on an east African
Middle Triassic dicynodont. Palaeontology 29:415–422.
Damiani, R., C. Vasconcelos, A. Renaut, J. Hancox, and A. Yates. 2007.
Dolichuranus primaevus (Therapsida, Anomodontia) from the Middle Triassic of Namibia and its phylogenetic relationships. Palaeontology 50:1531–1546.
DeFauw, S. L. 1986. The appendicular skeleton of African dicynodonts.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. Wayne State University, Detroit,
Michigan, 284 pp.
DeMar, R., and H. R. Barghusen. 1972. Mechanics and the evolution of
the synapsid jaw. Evolution 26:622–637.
Drysdall, A. R., and J. W. Kitching. 1963. A re-examination of the Karroo succession and fossil localities of part of the upper Luangwa
Valley. Geological Survey of Northern Rhodesia Memoir 1:1–62.
Dutuit, J.-M. 1988. Osteologie cr^anienne et ses enseignements, apports
geologique et paleoecologique, de Moghreberia nmachouensis, Dicynodonte (Reptilia, Therapsida) du Trias superieur marocain. Bulletin du Museum national d’Histoire naturelle Section C (Sciences de
la Terre, Paleontologie, Geologie, Mineralogie), 4e serie 10:227–285.
Ewer, R. F. 1961. The anatomy of the anomodont Daptocephalus leoniceps (Owen). Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London
136:375–402.
Farris, J. S., V. A. Albert, M. K€allersj€
o, D. Lipscomb, and A. G. Kluge.
1996. Parsimony jackknifing outperforms neighbor-joining. Cladistics 12:99–124.
Fr€
obisch, J. 2006. Locomotion in derived dicynodonts (Synapsida, Anomodontia): a functional analysis of the pelvic girdle and hind limb of Tetragonias njalilus. Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences 43:1297–1308.

226

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus

Fr€
obisch, J. 2009. Composition and similarity of global anomodont-bearing tetrapod faunas. Earth-Science Reviews 95:119–157.
Fourie, H. 1993. A detailed description of the internal structure of the
skull of Emydops (Therapsida: Dicynodontia). Palaeontologia africana 30:103–111.
Goloboff, P. A., J. S. Farris, and K. C. Nixon. 2008. TNT, a free program
for phylogenetic analysis. Cladistics 24:774–786.
Goloboff, P. A., C. I. Mattoni, and A. S. Quinteros. 2006. Continuous
characters analyzed as such. Cladistics 22:589–601.
Goloboff, P. A., J. S. Farris, M. K€allersj€
o, B. Oxelman, M. J. Ramırez,
and C. A. Szumik. 2003. Improvements to resampling measures of
group support. Cladistics 19:324–332.
Govender, R., P. J. Hancox, and A. M. Yates. 2008. Re-evaluation of the
postcranial skeleton of the Triassic dicynodont Kannemeyeria simocephalus from the Cynognathus Assemblage Zone (Subzone B) of
South Africa. Palaeontologia africana 43:19–37.
Hancox, P. J., K. D. Angielczyk, and B. S. Rubidge. 2013. Angonisaurus
and Shansiodon, dicynodonts (Therapsida, Anomodontia) from
subzone C of the Cynognathus Assemblage Zone (Middle Triassic)
of South Africa. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 33:655–676.
Huene, F. von. 1935. Die fossilen Reptilien des S€
udamerikanischen
Gondwanalandes. Ergebnisse der Sauriergrabungen in S€
udbrasilien
1928–29:1. Ordnung Anomodontia. C. H. Beck’sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, Munich, Germany, 92 pp.
Jain, S. L. 1996. Aspects of vertebrate fossils from Pranhita-Godavari
Valley with emphasis on dinosaur discoveries. Journal of the Palaeontological Society of India 41:1–16.
Jain, S. L., and T. Roy-Chowdhury. 1987. Fossil vertebrates from the
Pranhita-Godavari Valley (India) and their stratigraphic correlation; pp. 219–228 in J. W. Collinson, D. H. Elliot, S. M. Haban, and
G. D. McKenzie (eds.), Gondwana Six: Stratigraphy, Sedimentology, and Paleontology. Geophysical Monograph Series 41.
Jasinoski, S. C., E. J. Rayfield, and A. Chinsamy. 2009. Comparative
feeding biomechanics of Lystrosaurus and the generalized dicynodont Oudenodon. Anatomical Record 292:862–874.
Kaaya, C. Z. 1992. Depositional environment of Late Permian Karoo
beds in the Ruhuhu Basin and Mikumi area of Tanzania. Geologisches Institut der Universit€at zu K€
oln Sonderver€
offentlichungen
83:1–126.
Kammerer, C. F., K. D. Angielczyk, and J. Fr€
obisch. 2011. A Comprehensive Taxonomic Revision of Dicynodon (Therapsida, Anomodontia) and Its Implications for Dicynodont Phylogeny,
Biogeography, and Biostratigraphy. Society of Vertebrate Paleontology Memoir 11. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 31(6, Supplement 1), 158 pp.
Kammerer, C. F., J. Fr€
obisch, and K. D. Angielczyk. 2013. On the
validity and phylogenetic position of Eubrachiosaurus browni, a
kannemeyeriiform dicynodont (Anomodontia) from Triassic
North America. PLoS ONE 8:e64203. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0064203.
Kammerer, C. F., K. D. Angielczyk, and J. Fr€
obisch. 2015a. Redescription of the geikiid Pelanomodon (Therapsida, Dicynodontia), with
a reconsideration of ‘Propelanomodon.’ Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology. doi: 10.1080/02724634.2015.1030408.
Kammerer, C. F., K. D. Angielczyk, and J. Fr€
obisch. 2015b. Redescription of Digalodon rubidgei from the Late Permian of South Africa.
Fossil Record 18:43–55.
Kammerer, C. F., K. D. Angielczyk, and S. J. Nesbitt. 2018. Novel hind
limb morphology in a kannemeyeriiform dicynodont from the
Manda Beds (Songea Group, Ruhuhu Basin) of Tanzania; pp. 178–
188 in C. A. Sidor, and S. J. Nesbitt (eds.), Vertebrate and Climatic
Evolution in the Triassic Rift Basins of Tanzania and Zambia. Society of Vertebrate Paleontology Memoir 17. Journal of Vertebrate
Paleontology 37(6, Supplement).
Keyser, A. W. 1973. A new Triassic vertebrate fauna from South West
Africa. Palaeontologia africana 16:1–15.
Keyser, A. W. 1974. Evolutionary trends in Triassic Dicynodontia. Palaeontologia africana 17:69–85.
Keyser, A. W. 1975. A re-evaluation of the cranial morphology and systematics of some tuskless anomodonts. Memoirs of the Geological
Survey of South Africa 67:1–110.
Keyser, A. W., and A. R. I. Cruickshank. 1979. The origins and classification of Triassic dicynodonts. Transactions of the Geological Society
of South Africa 82:81–108.

King, G. M. 1981a. The functional anatomy of a Permian dicynodont.
Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B
291:243–322.
King, G. M. 1981b. The postcranial skeleton of Robertia broomiana, an
early dicynodont (Reptilia, Therapsida) from the South African
Karoo. Annals of the South African Museum 84:203–231.
King, G. M. 1985. The postcranial skeleton of Kingoria nowacki (von
Huene) (Therapsida: Dicynodontia). Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 84:263–289.
King, G. M. 1988. Anomodontia. Handbuch der Pal€aoherpetologie, 17C.
Gustav Fischer Verlag, Stuttgart, Germany, 174 pp.
King, G. M. 1994. The early anomodont Venjukovia and the evolution of
the anomodont skull. Journal of Zoology 232:651–673.
King, G. M., and M. A. Cluver. 1991. The aquatic Lystrosaurus: an alternative lifestyle. Historical Biology 4:323–342.
King, G. M., B. W. Oelofsen, and B. S. Rubidge. 1989. The evolution of
the dicynodont feeding system. Zoological Journal of the Linnean
Society 96:185–211.
Kopuchian, C., and M. J. Ramırez. 2010. Behaviour of resampling methods under different weighting schemes, measures, and variable
resampling strengths. Cladistics 26:86–97.
Laaß, M. 2015. Virtual reconstruction of the cranial endocast of Pristerodon mackayi (therapsida, Anomodontia). Journal of Morphology
276:1089–1099.
Lehman, J.-P. 1961. Dicynodontia; pp. 287–351 in J.-P. Piveteau (ed.),
Traite de Paleontologie, VI, Mammiferes, Volume 1: Origine Repti
lienne Evolution.
Masson et Cie, Paris.
Li, Y. 1983. Restoration of pelvic muscles in Lystrosaurus. Vertebrata
PalAsiatica 21:328–340.
Lucas, S. G. 1998. Global Triassic tetrapod biostratigraphy and biochronology. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology
143:347–384.
Lucas, S. G. 2010. The Triassic timescale based on nonmarine tetrapod
biostratigraphy and biochronology; pp. 447–507 in S. G. Lucas (ed.),
The Triassic Timescale. Geological Society, London Special Publication 334.
Maisch, M. W. 2001. Observation on Karoo and Gondwana vertebrates.
Part I: a new skull-reconstruction of Stahleckeria potens von Huene,
1935 (Dicynodontia, Middle Triassic) and a reconstruction of kannemeyeriiform phylogeny. Neues Jahrbuch f€
ur Geologie und
Pal€aontologie, Abhandlungen 220:127–152.
Maisch, M. W. 2003. Lower jaw morphology and jaw adductor musculature of the giant Permian dicynodont Rhachiocephalus Seeley, 1898
(Therapsida) from the Late Permian of Tanzania. Geologica et
Palaeontologica 37:89–106.
Maisch, M. W. 2005. Observations on Karoo and Gondwana vertebrates.
Part 6. A new rhachiocephalid dicynodont (Therapsida) from the
Upper Permian of the Ruhuhu Basin (Tanzania). Neues Jahrbuch
f€
ur Geologie und Pal€aontologie, Abhandlungen 237:313–355.
Mallon, J. C., and J. S. Anderson. 2014. The functional and palaeoecological implications of tooth morphology and wear for the megaherbivorous dinosaurs from the Dinosaur Park Formation (upper
Campanian) of Alberta, Canada. PLoS ONE 9:e98605. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0098605.
Mallon, J. C., and J. S. Anderson. 2015. Jaw mechanics and evolutionary palaeoecology of the megaherbivorous dinosaurs from
the Dinosaur Park Formation (Upper Campanian) of Alberta,
Canada. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology. doi: 10.1080/
02724634.2014.904323.
Markwort, S. 1991. Sedimentation und Diagenese der untertriadischen
Karoo Schichten des Ruhuhu Beckens, SW Tanzania. Geologisches
Institut, Universit€at K€
oln, Sonderver€
offentlichungen 80:1–118.
Marsicano, C. A., R. B. Irmis, A. C. Mancuso, R. Mundil, and F. Chemale. 2016. The precise temporal calibration of dinosaur origins. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 113:509–513.
Moldowan, P. D., R. J. Brooks, and J. D. Litzgus. 2015. Turtles with
“teeth”: beak morphology of Testudines with a focus on the tomiodonts of painted turtles (Chrysemys spp.). Zoomorphology. doi:
10.1007/s00435-015-0288-1.
Morato, L. 2006. Dinodontosaurus (Synapsida, Dicynodontia):
reconsituiç~
oes morfol
ogicas e aspectos biomech^anicos. Unpublished M.Sc. thesis, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul,
Porto Alegre, Brazil, 158 pp.

Angielczyk et al.—Redescription of Sangusaurus
Mueller, L. D., and F. J. Ayala. 1982. Estimation and interpretation of
genetic distance in empirical studies. Genetical Research 40:127–137.
Nabavizadeh, A. 2016. Evolutionary trends in the jaw adductor mechanics of ornithischian dinosaurs. The Anatomical Record 299:271–294.
Nabavizadeh, A., and D. B. Weishampel. 2016. The predentary bone and
its significance in the evolution of feeding mechanisms in ornithischian dinosaurs. The Anatomical Record 299:1358–1388.
Nesbitt, S. J., R. J. Butler, M. D. Ezcurra, P. M. Barrett, M. R. Stocker, K. D.
Angielczyk, R. M. H. Smith, C. A. Sidor, G. Niedzwiedzki, A. G. Sennikov, and A. J. Charig. 2017. The earliest bird-line archosaurs and the
assembly of the dinosaur body plan. Nature. doi: 10.1038/nature22037.
Nowack, E. 1937. Zur Kenntnis der Karruformation im Ruhuhu-Graben
(D.O.A.). Neues Jahrbuch f€
ur Mineralogie, Geologie, und
Pal€
aontologie, Abteilung B 78:380–412.
Olson, E. C. 1944. Origin of mammals based upon cranial morphology of
the therapsid suborders. Geological Society of America Special
Papers 55:1–136.
Ostrom, J. H. 1964. A functional analysis of jaw mechanics in the dinosaur Triceratops. Postilla 88:1–35.
Ottone, E. G., M. Monti, C. A. Marsicano, M. S. de la Fuente, M. Naipauer, R. Armstrong, and A. C. Mancuso. 2014. A new Late Triassic
age for the Puesto Viejo Group (San Rafael depocenter, Argentina): SHRIMP U–Pb zircon dating and biostratigraphic correlations across southern Gondwana. Journal of South American Earth
Sciences 56:186–199.
Owen, R. 1860. On the orders of fossil and recent Reptilia, and their distribution in time; pp. 153–166 in Report of the Twenty-Ninth Meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, 1859.
Pearson, H. S. 1924. A dicynodont reptile reconstructed. Proceedings of
the Zoological Society of London 1924:827–855.
Peecook, B. R., J.-S. Steyer, N. J. Tabor, and R. M. H. Smith. 2018.
Updated geology and vertebrate paleontology of the Triassic Ntawere Formation of northeastern Zambia, with special emphasis on
the archosauromorphs; pp. 8–38 in C. A. Sidor and S. J. Nesbitt
(eds.), Vertebrate and climatic evolution in the Triassic rift basins
of Tanzania and Zambia. Society of Vertebrate Paleontology Memoir 17. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 37 (6, supplement).
Ray, S. 2000. Endothiodont dicynodonts from the Late Permian Kundaram Formation, India. Palaeontology 43:375–404.
Ray, S. 2006. Functional and evolutionary aspects of the postcranial anatomy of dicynodonts (Synapsida, Therapsida). Palaeontology
49:1263–1286.
Ray, S., and A. Chinsamy. 2003. Functional aspects of the postcranial
anatomy of the Permian dicynodont Diictodon and their ecological
implications. Palaeontology 46:151–183.
Renaut, A. J. 2000. A re-evaluation of the cranial morphology of the Triassic dicynodont Kannemeyeria. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa, 191 pp.
Renaut, A. J. 2001. Dicynodont jaw mechanisms reconsidered: the Kannemeyeria (Anomodontia Therapsida) masticatory cycle. Asociaci
on
Palentol
ogica Argentina Publicaci
on Especial 7:167–170.
Renaut, A. J., R. J. Damiani, A. M. Yates, and P. J. Hancox. 2003. A taxonomic note concerning a dicynodont (Synapsida: Anomodontia) from
the Middle Triassic of East Africa. Palaeontologia africana 39:93–94.
Romer, A. S., and L. I. Price. 1944. Stahleckeria lenzii, a giant Triassic
Brazilian dicynodont. Bulletin of the Museum of Comparative
Zoology 93:465–491.
Roy-Chowdhury, T. 1970. Two new dicynodonts from the Triassic Yerrapalli Formation of central India. Palaeontology 13:132–144.
Sakamoto, M. 2010. Jaw biomechanics and the evolution of biting performance in theropod dinosaurs. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London B, Biological Sciences 277:3327–3333.
Sidor, C. A., R. M. H. Smith, A. K. Huttenlocker, and B. R. Peecook.
2014. New Middle Triassic tetrapods from the Upper Fremouw
Formation of Antarctica and their depositional setting. Journal of
Vertebrate Paleontology 34:793–801.

227

Simmons, M. P., and J. V. Freudenstein. 2011. Spurious 99% bootstrap
and jackknife support for unsupported clades. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 61:177–191.
Smith, R. M. H., C. A. Sidor, K. D. Angielczyk, S. J. Nesbitt, and N. J.
Tabor. 2018. Taphonomy and paleoenvironments of Middle Triassic
bone accumulations in the Lifua Member of the Manda Beds, Songea Group (Ruhuhu Basin), Tanzania; pp. 65–79 in C. A. Sidor and
S. J. Nesbitt (eds.), Vertebrate and Climatic Evolution in the Triassic Rift Basins of Tanzania and Zambia. Society of Vertebrate Paleontology Memoir 17. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 37(6,
Supplement).
Stockley, G. M. 1932. The geology of the Ruhuhu coalfields, Tanganyika
Territory. Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society of London
88:610–622.
Stockley, G. M., and F. Oates. 1931. Report on geology of the
Ruhuhu Coalfields. Bulletin of the Geological Survey of Tanganyika 2:1–68.
Strong, E. E., and D. Lipscomb. 2000. Character coding and inapplicable
data. Cladistics 15:363–371.
Sullivan, C., and R. R. Reisz. 2005. Cranial anatomy and taxonomy of the
late Permian dicynodont Diictodon. Annals of Carnegie Museum
74:45–75.
Sullivan, C. A., R. R. Reisz, and R. M. H. Smith. 2003. The Permian
mammal-like herbivore Diictodon, the oldest known example of
sexually dimorphic armament. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London B, Biological Sciences 270:173–178.
Sun, A.-L. 1963. The Chinese kannemeyeriids. Palaeontologica Sinica,
New Series C 17:1–109.
Surkov, M. V., and M. J. Benton. 2004. The basicranium of dicynodonts
(Synapsida) and its use in phylogenetic analysis. Palaeontology
47:619–638.
Surkov, M. V., and M. J. Benton. 2008. Head kinematics and feeding
adaptations of the Permian and Triassic dicynodonts. Journal of
Vertebrate Paleontology 28:1120–1129.
Tanoue, K., B. S. Grandstaff, H. You, and P. Dodson. 2009. Jaw mechanics in basal Ceratopsia (Ornithischia, Dinosauria). The Anatomical
Record 292:1352–1369.
Tollman, S. M., F. E. Grine, and B. D. Hahn. 1980. Ontogeny and sexual
dimorphism in Aulacephalodon (Reptilia, Anomodontia). Annals
of the South African Museum 81:159–186.
Vega-Dias, C., and C. L. Schultz. 2004. Postcranial material of Jachaleria
candelariensis Ara
ujo and Gonzaga 1980 (Therapsida, Dicynodontia), Upper Triassic of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. PaleoBios
24:7–31.
Vega-Dias, C., M. W. Maisch, and C. L. Schultz. 2004. A new phylogenetic analysis of Triassic dicynodonts (Therapsida) and the systematic position of Jachaleria candelariensis from the Upper Triassic of
Brazil. Neues Jahrbuch f€
ur Geologie und Pal€aontologie, Abhandlungen 231:145–166.
Walter, L. R. 1986. The limb posture of kannemeyeriid dicynodonts:
functional and ecological considerations; pp. 89–97 in K. Padian
(ed.), The Beginning of the Age of Dinosaurs. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.
Watson, D. M. S. 1912a. On some reptilian lower jaws. Annals and Magazine of Natural History Series 8 10:573–587.
Watson, D. M. S. 1912b. The skeleton of Lystrosaurus. Albany Museum
Records 2:287–295.
Watson, D. M. S. 1948. Dicynodon and its allies. Proceedings of the
Zoological Society of London 118:823–877.
Yeh, H.-K. 1959. New dicynodont from Sinokannemeyeria-fauna from
Shansi. Vertebrata PalAsiatica 3:187–204.
Submitted November 24, 2016; revisions received May 1, 2017;
accepted September 30, 2017.
Memoirs editor: Randall Irmis.

