No. 4918

February 1, 1964

NATURE

A brief swnrnary is contained in the HiBtory of the Second
World War Medical Research (H.M.S.O., 1953).
Collaboration between the scientists of the two countries
up to the end of 1943 was informal and far from complete.
Both groups made great progress in examination of the
degradation products of penicillin. American workers
seem to have been responsible for at least one of the most
useful discoveries, namely, the crystallization of sodium
benzyl penicillin by McPhillamy, Wintersteiner and Alicino
of the Squibb Laboratories. Two other achievements may
be m entioned in this connexion: (l) The discovery that
the penicillin, obtained by surface culture, investigated
by the British chemists is not chemically identical with
that investigated by the Americans, obtained from deep
fermentations. Analytical results from Merck laboratories,
and the examination of crystalline compounds made b y
treatment of penicillin with benzylamine (Peoria laboratories) were factors in this discovery. This led to the
designations Penicillins F and G (U.S.); I and II (Great
Britain). (2) The discovery in the Peoria laboratory that
phenyl acetic acid is obtained on hydrolysis of p enicillin
and that the addition of phenyl acetic acid to the culture
medium increases the yield of penicillin. Eli Lilly and
Co. adopted the practice of adding derivatives of phenyl
acetic acid to culture media in their production plant.
In the second half of 1943, encouraged by progress
toward understanding of the chemistry of penicillin as
well as by the spectacular results of therapeutic trials,
stimulated also by the fear that natural fermentation
could not supply the future need for penicillin and hence
that a synthetic m ethod must be devised if possible,
officials of the two Governments, United States and
Great Britain, began plans for the establishment of
formal intergovernmental collaboration. The director of
O.S.R.D. , Dr. Vannevar Bush, appointed a committee of
three chemists, Hans T. Clarke, Roger Adams and R. D.
Coghill, to survey and report on chemical personnel and
organizations within the United States fitted by skill and
facilities to advance the chemical problem. He proposed
to Sir Edward Mellanby, secretary of the British Medical
Research Council, that a similar investigation and report
be formulated in Great Britain and that a system of
prompt and full exchange of information be adopted by
the two Govemments.
The resulting plan became
effective early in 1944 and continued tmtil the end of the
War. It contained the extraordinary provision that the
determination of ownership of patent rights, originating
from inventions in the United States, should be made by
the director of O.S.R.D. Included in this intemational
effort were four British and five American universities;
five British and ten American commercial firms; one
British and four American Govemment agencies; two
British and two American research foundations. The
number of participants was more than 300; the number of
reports exchanged was about 700. The usual legal
difficulties which included the drafting of contracts accept-

445

able to all parties were successfully solved by the general
counsel to O.S.R.D., Mr. John T . Connor, and his successor, Mr. Oscar M. Ruebhausen.
The outcome of this tremendous joint effort can b,.
swnrnarized by the statements that: (1) an encyclopredia
of information had been assembled concerning the chemical constitution and b ehaviour of a n ew group of compounds-penicillins-not hitherto found in Nature; ( 2)
minute amounts of a substance had been synthesized by
both the American and British investigators which
proved to be identical with natural penicillin both with
respect to antibacterial activity and destructibility by the
penicillin -destroying enzyme, penicillinase; (3) by the
isotope dilution method, identity of the synthetic and
the natural substance was made certain.
These scientific achievements did not, however, brin~?:
with them change in commercial production of penicillin.
Fermentation processes had become so productive and
economical that it can be said without gross exaggeration
that the cost of manufacture of 100,000 units of penicillin
is scarcely more than the cost of material and labour
required to put it into an a mpoule and that the scientific
results gave no prospect that a competitive synthetic
process of commercial production of penicillin would be
devised.
Fig. 1 shows the progress of production and supply of
penicillin by commercial organizations from February
1942 until the end of the War. What began as a trickle
from a few companies became a flood of billions of unit.c;
as better media and more productive strains were discovered and a greater number of industrial units engaged
in production. The following quotation is taken from
Volume 2 (p. 651) of the book Antibiotics, assembled by
Florey and the Oxford group:
" ... too high a tribute cannot be paid to the enterprise
and energy with which the American manufacturing firms
tackled the large-scale production of the drug. Had it
not been for their efforts there would certainly not havl'
been sufficient penicillin by D-day in Normandy in 1944
to treat all severe casualties, both British and American."
It might be added that the efforts of American manufacturing firms could not have been so promptly and success·
fully put forth had not the agencies of the United StateR
C'x0vemment a nd the National Research Council mentioned
in this account supplied courageous 1mderstanding and
essential support.
Fleming, Alexander, Brit. J. Exp. Path .. 10, 226 (1929).
'Clutterbuck, P. W., Lovell, R., and Ralstrlck, H., Bioche1>1. J ., 26.
1907 (1932). Reid, R. D. , J. Bact., 29,215 (1935).
• Chain, E. , Florey, H . W., Gardner, A. D., Heatley, N. G., Jennings, M.A ..
Orr-Ewing , J ., and Sanders, A. G., Lancet, ii. 226 (1940).
• Abraham , E. P., Chain. E., Fletcher, C. M., Florey, H. W., Gardner, A. D ..
Heatley, N. G., and Jennings, M.A., Lancet, !i, 177 (1941).
'Coghill, R. D., Ohem. Eng. News, 22, 588 (1944). Coghill, R. D., and Koch,
R. S., ibid .• 23, 2310 (1945). Raper, K. B., Yearbook .Agric., 702 (194347); .Adv. Military Med., 2, 723 (1948).
• Anderson, D. G., and Keefer, C. S., The Therapeutic Value of PeniciUin :
A Study of 10,000 Oases (Edwards: Ann Arbor, 1948).
1

THE BRITISH MUSEUM (NATURAL HISTORY)- UNIVERSITY OF LONDON
JOINT PALJEONTOLOGICAL EXPEDITION TO NORTHERN
RHODESIA AND TANGANYIKA, 1963
By J. ATTRIDGE. DR. H. W. BALL, DR. A. J. CHARIG and DR. C. B. COX
HE nineteenth century was a time of exploration
and colonization. Many Europeans in newly explored
territories throughout the world-mainly soldiers, doctors,
missionaries and engineers-were interested in fossils;
they collected what they found, and, if British themselves, they usually sent their material to the British
Museum for appraisal and description. The collections of

T

Permian and Triassic reptiles thus obtained from the
Karoo rocks of southem Africa include the types of many
new genera and species, and are of great historical and
scientific value. Yet they often consist only of skulls, the
collectors having ignored any post-cranial material, and
are often poorly preserved and prepared. Moreover, they
frequently lack precise geographical and geological

© 1964 Nature Publishing Group

NATURE

446

,_....-----·-·

I

/
NORTHERN
RHO.DE.SIA

-·-·-.

'·

'·'\_
(

\

\
I
0

1'1ilt..S.

Fig.l

information, so that a typical label may even read "From
the Karoo of Cape Colony".
Twentieth-century collecting practice has become more
methodical, with greatly improved excavation techniques
and accurate recording of all relevant details. It is difficult
for any but the professional palreontologist, adequately
supplied with money and resources, to collect large fossils
in this way in comparatively remote country; and the
quantity of such material submitted to the British
Museum (Natural History) by amateurs, for this reason
and for others, has declined. Even professional geologists,
conducting routine surveys, can usually do no more than
pick up chance discoveries of weathered surface material.
It is therefore not surprising that, until now, the Museum
had received practically no further reptile material from
the Karoo, either from the well-known deposits of South
Africa or from the other fossiliferous areas discovered
further north; its collections of such material could
therefore no longer be compared in either quality or
quantity with those of institutions in South Africa
itself.
The afore-named Expedition, which returned to England
recently, has now remedied this situation to some
extent with largo collections of good material for both
display and research. It was conceived and organized by four London palreontologists: Alan Charig and
H. W. Ball, of the British Museum (Natural History),
and John Attridge and Barry Cox, both lecturers in
zoology in the University of London (at Birkbock and
King's Colleges, respectively). Dr. Ball unfortunately
suffered a recurrence of an injury to his back and was
obliged to return home after only one month, but the
others remained in Africa from June until October.
Several other workers helped them for shorter periods.

voL. 201

I~ was _decided to visit two parts of
Afnca whiCh appeared to be of especial
interest (Fig. 1). The upper Luangwa
Valley of Northem Rhodesia had been
surveyed in 1928 and 1935 by Dixeyl• 2 ,
whose collection of vertebrate fossils,
deposited in the South African Museum
(Cape Town), was described by Boonstra•;
but the inaccessibility of the region had for
long prevented any further investigation.
During 1960-61, however, James Kitching,
of the Bernard Price Institute for Paheontological Research, University of the Wit_.....
watersrand, visited the area with Alan
Drysdall, of the Northern Rhodesia Geological Survey•; they found vertebrate
fossils both in the Upper Madumabisa
Mudstone of tho Permian, where they wore
extremely abundant, and in the Triassic
Ntawere Formation and Red Marl. This
material is at present in Johannesburg.
The other area concemed was the
Ruhuhu Valley in south-westem Tanganyika, where vertebrate fossils had first
been found in 1930 (ref. 5). Good collections made in 1933-35 (now in Cambridge,
luJ
Tiibingen and Munich) had shown the
l:::l
presence of both Permian and Triassic
jd
terrestrial vertebrate faunas, just as in
I 1!1
Northern Rhodesia. There was already
,.- ) t:
an extensive literature on the many new
/
~
forms found. It was evident, however,
0
that there were many other new forms
t:
represented by tantalizingly incomplete
material; that further knowledge of all
these creatures was highly desirable; and,
further, that the Triassic fauna in particular was likely to be of great importance in
investigations of evolution, stratigraphical
correlation and palreogeography.
The party set out in two Land-Rovers
from Salisbury, Southern Rhodesia; they were joined in
Lusaka by James Kitching. whose mwanny ability as
a field collector is almost legendary. Kitching stayed
with the Expedition for four weeks in the Luangwa,
showed them the known fossiliferous areas, and himself
discovered a large proportion of the material collected
there.
Camp was sot up near Sitwe, a small village in Northern
Rhodesia on a tributary of the Luangwa, 125 miles north
of tho District headquarters at Lundazi and close to the
Nyasaland border. As the dirt road ended at Sitwo, and
as the fossils were scattered over some 400 square miles of
almost uninhabited mopane scrub, it was necessary to
make or reopen quite extensive stretches of track. One
such track was 32 miles long and crossed 20 river-beds,
which, though generally dry at this time of year, were
mostly steep-walled; the construction of drifts to render
them passable by Land-Rovers required a great deal of
labour. The thick cover of grass and small bushes had
then to be burned off before searching could begin. Local
men were employed for all these jobs and for carrying
the fossils back to the vehicles.
About 220 specimens, weighing (packed) some 2-3 tons,
were collected in this area. Most of tho material was
from the more richly fossiliferous Permian beds, the
Upper Madumabisa Mudstone, where the fossils usually
occur in red or purple ferruginous nodules ; though many
specimens consist only of skulls (Fig. 2), some more or
less complete skeletons were found (Fig. 3). As in the
South African Karoo, the anomodonts or dicynodonts
(herbivorous synapsid reptiles) account for about 90 per
cent of the specimens from the Upper Permian. The rest
of the fauna consists almost entirely of carnivorous
synapsids (gorgonopsians and therocephalians), though

TAN GANYI KR
,/

February 1, 1964

© 1964 Nature Publishing Group

No 491a

February 1, 1964

NATURE

Fig. 2. Anomodont skull from the Permian Madumabisa Mudstone of
N ortheru Rhodesh•

Fig. ~- Anomodont skeleton from the Permian Madumabiss Mudstone
of Northern Rhodesia, as found

pareiasaurid cotylosaurs are found occasionally. The
genera and species identified indicate levels equivalent to
the Endothiodon and Kistecephalus zones of South Africa.
The Triassic fossils, on the other hand, are generally
almost free of matrix, occurring as dissociated elements
which have weathered out of the soft dark red mudstones
and grits of the Ntawere Formation and Red Marl. They
are not normally abundant; yet at one locality the side
of a small hill was found to be covered with 500-600
absolutely clean anomodont bones, mostly post-cranial,
of which some were complete.
Other, less common
elements in the Ntawere fauna. are the remains of large
cynodonts, pseudosuchians, a large amphibian and the
fresh-water bivalve Unio karrooensis. This faunal assemblage is later than that of the Lower Triassic Cynognathus
zone of South Africa, and may therefore be of Middle
Triassic age; and the discovery of pseudosuchians, not
recorded by earlier expeditions, is of particular importance
in this connexion.
After breaking camp at Sitwe, the Expedition was
joined in Ltmdazi by three new members: A . W.
Crompton, director of the South African Museum in Cape
Town; Dr. Barney Hirschson, a Cape Town radiologist,
who acted as medical officer; and A. R. I. Cruickshank ,
assistant leoturer in zoology in the Universit.y of
Edinburgh. The whole party then drove around the
northem end of Lake Nyasa to the Ruhuhu Valloy in

447

Tanganyika. Camp was set up near Litumba, a Benedict_ine mission fifty miles west of the Ruvuma Regional
cap1tal at Songea. As before, motor tracks to the fossil
localities were constructed by local Africans; the total
length of these was less than in Rhodesia (about 20 miles),
but some of the watercourses still carried sufficient water to
make it necessary to build bridges rather than drifts. The
bridge over the Rutukira River was more than I 00 ft. long.
Stockley 5 and Nowack• had indicated the general areas
in which bone had been found , but their lack of accurate
maps had mado it impossible for them to indicate the
precise localities. Each area, therefore, had now to be
searched for exposures. 'l'hese were usually found whore
~he harder strata outcropped to form low ridges or hillocks,
m the walls of dried-up streams, and, in particular, in the
systems of small gulleys and eroded flats often to be
found at the heads of streams. As the country is fairly
level and much of it was covered by dense high grass,
generally too green to burn, fossiliferous exposures were
difficult to find. The local Africans, however, soon learned
what the fossils looked like and the sort of place in which
they might be found, and, being well acquainted with the
area, they too discovered many new localities. Altogether
the Expedition found thirty-five localities yielding good
bone.
\V. W. Bishop, curator of tho Uganda Museum, Kampala, joined the Expedition in its final stages to map
these localities and to study their stratigraphical
relationships. His work was of immense help to the
Expedition; it showed, among other things, that most
of the Triassic localities are exposures of one comparatively rich fossiliferous level, though a few localities below
and above this level were also found.
Twenty-seven fossil localities, scattered over an area of
some 50 square miles, were in the Middle Triassic Manda
Formation (KS). This Formation consists of fairly soft,
pink and purple sandstones and green and purple marls.
Though bones found in the sandstones are usually free of
encrustation, those in the marls are often coated with a
hard layer of variable thickness and composition. If they
had not already been weathered out, the fossils were
easily excavated from the soft rock, fragile and articulated
specimens being strengthened and protected by a plasterof-Paris jacket.
Four groups of reptiles were found in the Manda
Formation, in approximately equal numbers: archosaurs,
rhynchosaurs, anomodonts and cynodonts. The most
important archosaur discovery was an incomplete skull
and jaws 2ft. long (Fig. 4) superficially similar to those of
a large modem crocodile, with 4!-in. teeth; previous
finds of archosaur skull material in Middle Triassic beds,
except in Argentina, had consisted only of isolated
fragments. Several small excellently preserved archosaur
skeletons were collected, sometimes articulated, at least
one with its skull. An unusual find was an isolated a.rcho-

Fig. 4.

Archosanr skull from the Triassic Manda Formatiou or
Tanganyika, after excavation

© 1964 Nature Publishing Group

448

NATURE

saurian dorsal vertebra bearing a strong neural spine more
than five times as hi gh as the centrum. These finds a re of
the greatest importance, for , while no dinosaurs h ave yet
been d escribed from t.he Manda Formation or from beds
of comparable age (unless these include the "Mesotriasico
Superior" of Argentina), the Manda archosaurs collected by
Farrington include pseudosuehians (Mandasuchus, Teleocrate?·), which a re closer than a ny other known reptile to
the primitive saurischians of t h e Upper Trias.
The abundant rhy nchosaur m a teria.] includes skeletons
which are almost complete and which will therefore prov ide excellent museum exhibi ts. It should p ermit description of the internal a n atomy, hit herto unknown, of tho
skull of Stenwulorhynchus.
Thoro are also a number of nearly complete anomodont
skeletons, some in articulation, of which one may belong
to the genus Kannemeyeria. A large skull represen ts a
new anomodont genus.
The cynodont material includes some excellent partial
Rkulls, some with complete brain-cases a nd others with
teeth. The fa una is of particular inter est as it contains
many small and relatively unspecializod forms which may
throw some light on the origin of mammals.
The Manda fatma considered as a whole is similal' to
the Ntawere fauna of Northern Rhodesia; in particular,
both faunas include Unio karrooensis.
The Ntawere,
however, differs in one striking respect- -the apparent
a bsence of rhynchosaurs. It is interesting to note that
one Manda locality, b elow the richest level, yielded an
anomodont provisionally identified as Kannemeyeria-a
genus found hitherto only in t h e Lower Triassic CynofJnat hus zone of South Africa. If this specimen is indeed
Kannemeyeria, it might indicate that the genus p ersisted
into Middle Triassic times, the fauna of which is not well
represented-if at all- in South Africa.
Tho collecting in the Ruhuhu Valley, in contrast to
t.hat in the Luangwa, was concentrated on the Triassic
beds. The Expedition, however, also found a few P ermian
localities, which yielded a predominantly anomodont
fauna, including some excellent specimens of the anomodont Endothiodon. It was at first assumed that tho latter,
like those already d escribed from the same region, were
from the Kawinga Formation 7 (K6, Lower Bone Bed,
Lower bone-bearing series, etc., of earlier authors); but
Dr. Bishop established that they were, in fact, from the
underlying Ruhuhu B eds (K5), which had been thought.
t o contain no vertebrate remains. These Ruhuhu Beds,
and perhaps the lowest part of the Kawinga Formation,
are therefore homotaxial with the Endothiodon zone of
South Africa. The Permian v ertebrates from Tanganyika,
like those from Northern Rhodesia, usually occur as
nodules in the mudstones of the Ruhuhu Beds and the
Kawinga Formation, but they lack the h eavy ferruginous
covering characteristic of tho Rhodesian specimens.
The weight of fossil material collected in Tanga n y ika,
eomprising some 230 specimens, was about 2- 3 tons
(ahnost exactly as in Rhodesia) . Thus a total of 5 tons
of Permian and Triassic fossil reptiles, r epresented by
450 entries in the field catalogue, has now arrived in
England from the collecting areas of East and Central
Africa. Its development in the laboratory (using both
mechanical methods and aeid techniques) will necessitate
s ome years of work, but it is hoped that the more promising
material may be described fairly quickly.
The general organization of the Expedition may be
contrasted with that of the p ioneers of the nineteenthirties--Dixey, Stockley, Farrington and Nowack-who
travelled about the country by 'porter safari'. It might
soom paradoxical that the present Expedit ion, equipped
with motor-vehicles, was far less mobile than its pedestrian
predecessors. On 'porter safari' a camp was sot up at the
nearest convenient site to a promising fossil locality, so
t.h at virtually the whole of each working day could be
spent at that locality and any others nearby; the comparatively small quantity of equipment and stores was

February 1, 1964

voL . 201

carried to t he next camp-site by a column of porters. As
the porters could march without difficulty in any direction,
crossing rivers such as the Ruhuhu or Rutukira where
necessary by dug-o ut canoe, every p art was acce;>sible
a nd an ad hoc itinerary could bo followed.
The 1963 Expedition was organized on an e-ntirely
different basis . Tho professional and family commitments
of its prosp ective members limited its d{Jration to four
months; the Long Vacation, June-October, fortunately
coincides with the middle of the dry season, which is the
most suitable and pleasant time for field work. But as
tho time to be spent in the field was thus restricted to
twelve weeks, exclusive of travelling, it was conside1·od
necessary to have a la rger party (of 4-7 persons). A party
as large as this required so much equipment and stores
tha t to move the b ase camp from one place to another
in t ho same field area would h ave taken several days.
Valuable time was spent in building tracks, operations
were limited to areas accessible from those tracks, and
the crossing of major rivers n ecessitated enormous detours.
On the ot h er hand, the size of the Expedit ion, together
with t h e use of Land-Rovers, m ad e it possible to explore
an ext ensive area from each of t ho base camps and to
work two or t hree scattered fos sil localities simultaneously;
and even quite distant sites could be visited by sett.ing up
a small temporary camp nearby. Such a party, moreover,
could include specia lists on several groups of rept ih~s.
with various skills in collecting techniques and !l'eneral
Expedition duties.
At this point it is fitting to pay tribute to the pioneers
of the 'thirtie"-s, who not only endured uncomfortable
living conditions but also risked their health-which, in
some cases, was permanently impaired. Tho 1963 party
enjoyed the convenience of refrigerators, regular supplies
of fresh food, newspapers and mail, and effective equipment for the sterilization of wa ter ; modern drugs a nd
a nti-snake serum were availa ble, a qualified medical
practitioner was with them for part of the time, and, had
it been necessary, their Land-Rovers could have transported them to hospital in a matter of hours.
Experience shows that the following points are important. First, it is better to seek new localities rather than
those of previous collectors, which are generally difficult
to find and often worked out. Secondly, all temptations
to make other sorts of natural history collections- plants,
insects, et c.--should be resisted; time does not allow.
Thirdly, it, is essential that an expedition of this nature
should include an expert cartographer and stratigrapher,
supplied with all a vailable large-scale maps and aerial
photographs. At the same time, experience has modified
the rather critical attitude adopted by members of the
Expedition towards those early collectors from tho South
African Karoo who so often ignored post-cranial material ;
when limitations of time impose a choice between collecting
one skull, together with every tiny fragment of its not
p articularly informative skeleton, and, alternatively, collecting several superb skulls and leaving tho associated
sk eletons b ehind, there is sometimes a good ca..<;e for
choosing the latter.
The Expedition was financed by tho Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research, the Royal Society, the
Percy Sladen Memorial Fund, tho Godma n Exploration
Fund and Shell R esearch, Ltd. Freo heavy t•·ansport,
free services of many kinds, advice on v a 1•ious topics and
the necessary collect ing and export licences wero generously given by Government and university departments,
museums, other institutions and individuals far too
nume rous to mention here; and many companies in
Britain and southern Africa kindly supplied food and
drugs either free or at reduced cost. So much help made
it possible to plan the Expedition with a minimum of
financial worry.
The four 'full-time' members of the Bxpedition also
thank the five 'part-time' m embers mentioned h ere for
their invaluable co-operation and help ; the B ernard

© 1964 Nature Publishing Group

No.4ela

February 1, 1964

NATURE

Price Institute, the South African Museum and the
Uganda Museum for releasing such senior members of
their staffs; and, last but not least, the many friendly,
helpful and cheerful Africans who worked so hard on the
.1£xpedition's behalf in both Northern Rhode3ia and
Tanganyika.

449

1

Dixcy, 1>'., R ep. Geol. Surv. Nyasalanrl, 24 (1935).
'Dixey, F., Quad. J. Geol. Soc. Lond .• 93, ;.2 (1937).
'Boonstra, J,. D .. Quart . ./. Geol. Sor·. Lond., 94, 371 (10:38).
: Drysdall, A. R., and Kitching •.). \Y., Mem. Geol. Sun:. X. Rlwd . . l (1963).
"Stockley, G. M . • Quart. J. Geul. Soc. Land., 88, 610 (1H32) .
'Nowack, K, Neues Jb. Min. Geol. Palaont.,Abt. B, Beil.·Bd. 78, a8o (HJ:Ji).
7
Charig, A. J ., Rec. Geol. Surv. Tar~.ganyika, 10 for H>60, 47 (l!lll:~).

NEWS and VIEWS
Physics at the University of Lancaster:
Prof. E. R. Dobbs
DR. E. R . DoBBS has been appointed to the chair of
physics at the new University of Lancaster. Dr. Dobbs
graduated at University College, London, in 1943, where
he began research under Prof. E. N. da C. Andrade on
the viscosity of liquid metals. He was appointed to the
academic staff of Queen Mary College in 1949 and worked
in low-temperature physics on pr.operties of the solidified
inert gases, utilizing X-ray crystallography and ultrasonic
techniques. After two years' leave of absence in the
United States at Brown University, where he worked on
micro-wave acoustics, he went to the Royal Society Mond
Labomtory, Cambridge, as an Associated Electrical
Industries Fellow, continuing to work in the field of
m.icrowaye acoustics applied to solid-state problems. He
has recently been visiting physicist at the Argonne
National Laboratory, Chicago. Dr. Dobbs has a wide
experience of the experimental methods of solid-state
physics and teaching experience gained in several different
university traditions which will serve him in good. stead
in the new University of Lancaster.

Biochemistry at the University of Canterbury. New
Zealand:
Prof. B. H. Howard
DR. B. H. HowARD, who has been appointed to the
newly created chair of biochemistry at Lincoln College,
University of Canterbury, New Zealand, is a graduate of
the University of Manchester.
Owing to war-time
conditions he was not immediately able to take up a post
in the field of biochemistry, which was his main interest,
but was employed for some time in commercial and
Government laboratories. In 194 7 he moved to the London
School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine as personal
assistant to Prof. H. Raistrick where he carried out
work on the metabolic products, especially the colouring
matters, of Penicillium and Aspergillus species. This
work was incorporated in a number of papers in the
Biochem1:cal Journal, and during this period Howard
obtained a Ph.D. degree of the University of London.
His work in London also included some teaching of bio·
chemist-ry and microbiology. In early 1954 he joined the
staff of tho Rowatt Research Institute in the Microbiology Department where he started an investigation
into the biochemistry of the rumen protozoa, a field
which at that time was virtually unexplored. Since then
he has published alone, or in collaboration with Dr.
Abou Akkada, a visiting worker at the Institute, some
ten papers on this subject. His work in this field has
greatly extended knowledge of the metabolism of the
anaerobic rumen protozoa and has laid a foundation on
which future workers can build. Dr. Howard was elected
a Fellow of the Royal Institute of Chemistry in 1958.
In 1961 he spent a year in New Zealand as a Department
of Scientific and Industrial Research Senior Fellow
at the Plant Chemistry Laboratories, Palmerston North.

Agricultural Chemistry at the University of Leeds:
Prof. D. lewis
DR. D. LE\VIS has been appointed to the chair of
agricultural chemistry in the Department of Agt·iculture,
University of Leeds, from a date to be arranged. Dr.

Lewis graduated with honours in agrimdtural chemistry
at tho U m verstty College of Wales, Aber:vst\Yyth, in 1946,
and was awarded the degree of ::\LSc. in 1947. He then
entered the School of Biochemistry at the University of
Cambndge and, a year later, h e obtained honours in
Part II of tho Natural Science Tripos (biochemistry) . H e
was elected senior scholar of St. John's College. He joined
the staff of the Department of Microbioloav in the
University of Sheffield in 1949 and was a.ward;d a Ph.D.
degree by that University in 1951. He was a m ember of
the staff of the Agricultural Research Council Institute
of Animal Physiology, Cambridge, from 19.')2 until 1958:
his rese~rch w~s. mainly concerned with certain aspect.~
of protem nutntwn of sheep and their thyroid function.
He wa~ apJ?oint.ed Jec~urer in agricultural chemistry at
the Untversity of Nottmgham in 1958 and promoted t.o a
readership in agricultural chemistry in 1961.

Medical Microbiology at St. Thomas's Hospital Medical
School:
Prof. A. P. Waterson
DR. A. P. WATERSON has been a ppointed to t.ho chair
of medical microbiology at St. Thomas's Hospital Medical
School. Dr. Waterson, who is forty year·s of age, was
ed?cated at Epsom College, Emmanuel College, Cambndge, and thP- London Hospital Medical College, where h e
qualified in . medicine in 1947. At Cambridge, Waterson
was placed m Class I both in the Natural Sciences Tripos.
Part I, and in Part II (biochemistry).
After house
appointments at the London Hospital ~nd service in thP
Royal Air Force in Germany, he took the M.R.C.P.
(London) in 1950 and returned to Cambridge as hous(~
physician at Addenbrooke's Hospital, whore he afterwards
worked for two years in the clinical laboratories. He was
appointed University demonstrator in pathology in 1953.
He took tho M.D. (Cambridge) in 1954. Since 1958 hn
has been University lecturer in pathology. He is a Fellow
of Emmanuel College, and a tutor and director of studies
in medicine at the College. Following somo work on the
titration of viruses by plaque formation in tissue culture
~is r~sea~ch has been concerned principally with a~
mvesttgatwn of the structure of the viruses of man and
other vertebrates, and of the biological significance of thH
components of the viral particle.
This has involved
particularly the viruses of the influenza and parainfluenza
groups, and also the measles gnmp. He is the author of
Int1·oduction to Animal Virology (1961).

British Technical Co-operation Overseas
IN reply to questions in the Honse of Conunons on
January 14, the Secretary for Technical Co-operation,
Mr. R. Carr, said Britain was spending noady £1 million
in .th? present financial year on supporting research in
Brttam for the benefit of developing countries. He in.
stanced t.ho Anti-locust Research Centre, the Tropical
Prodt~cts II_tstitute and the Tsetse Fly Laboratory, opened
at Bnstol m December. Grants were also made by his
Department for research at universities and othflr inst.ituti~ns. On the advice of the Colonial University Grants
Advisory Committee, he had allocated £325,000 to the
new University of Basutoland, the Bechuanaland Protectorate and Swaziland from funds available under the
Commonwealth Development Act, 1963. for tho three>

© 1964 Nature Publishing Group

