J. BOTHA AN D R.M.H. SMI T H

Biostratigraphy of the Lystrosaurus declivis
Assemblage Zone (Beaufort Group, Karoo
Supergroup), South Africa
J. Botha
National Museum, P.O. Box 266, Bloemfontein, 9300, South Africa
Department of Zoology and Entomology, University of the Free State, 9300, South Africa
e-mail: jbotha@nasmus.co.za
R.M.H. Smith
Evolutionary Studies Institute, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, 2050 South Africa
Karoo Palaeontology, Iziko South African Museum, Cape Town, 8000, South Africa
e-mail: Roger.Smith4@wits.ac.za
© 2020 Geological Society of South Africa. All rights reserved.

Abstract
The earliest Triassic (Induan) Lystrosaurus Assemblage Zone has long been recognised as a particularly signiﬁcant
biozone in palaeoecological and palaeoenvironmental studies as it contains a community assemblage that records the
survival and recovery from the end-Permian mass extinction (EPME). Here renamed the Lystrosaurus declivis Assemblage
Zone it represents the best record globally of the ecological changes in terrestrial community structure and stability
during this time period. The assemblage is dominated by two species of small to medium-sized herbivorous dicynodonts
L. declivis and L. murrayi that co-occur in equal abundance, along with a range of smaller and less common faunivorous
and insectivorous taxa. The latter comprise cynodonts (Thrinaxodon, Galesaurus, and Platycraniellus), therocephalians
(Olivierosuchus, Regisaurus and Promoschorhynchus), the diminutive parareptiles (Saurodektes, Sauropareion, Colleta,
Phonodus and Procolophon) and eureptilian arrivals possibly representing immigrant taxa (Prolacerta, Heleosuchus and
Noteosuchus), among others. The attendant large carnivores were sabre-toothed Moschorhinus and the long-snouted
archosauromorph Proterosuchus. In the aftermath of the mass extinction, new small temnospondyl taxa established their
ﬁrst occurrences i.e. Broomistega, Lydekkerina, and Micropholis, and have relatively high abundances compared to
earlier temnospondyl records in the Karoo. Lithostratigraphically, the biozone for the most part spans the upper
Palingkloof Member of the Balfour Formation and the overlying Katberg Formation in the western part of the basin, and
the Normandien Formation in the east. The Lystrosaurus declivis Assemblage Zone of the main Karoo Basin hosts the
type locality of the global Lootsbergian land-vertebrate faunachron. The biozone is one of the most widespread terrestrial
faunal assemblages of western Gondwana with closely related species occurring in India and Antarctica. Similar, but
much more distantly related taxa, occur in Induan-aged strata of Russia, China and Brazil.
Name
The Lystrosaurus declivis Assemblage Zone.
Proposer of name

it to include the biostratigraphic range of Procolophon. Here,
we propose the name Lystrosaurus declivis Assemblage Zone
after the most common tetrapod species found, and limited to,
the biozone.

Broom (1906) proposed the name ‘Lystrosaurus Beds’ for the
biozone, but it was redeﬁned by Kitching (1970) who expanded

SOUTH AFRICAN JOURNAL OF GEOLOGY 2020 • VOLUME 123.2 PAGE 207-216 • doi:10.25131/ sajg .123.0015

Downloaded from https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/gssa/sajg/article-pdf/123/2/207/5083298/207_0015_botha_smith.pdf
by University of Exeter user

207

B I O S T R AT I G R A P HY OF THE LY ST ROSAURUS DE C LIV IS ASSEMBLAGE ZONE (BEAUFORT GROUP, KAROO SUPERGROUP)
SOUTH AFRICA

Stratigraphic position
Biostratigraphic position
Overlies the Daptocephalus Assemblage Zone and underlies the
Cynognathus Assemblage Zone.
Lithostratigraphic position
The biozone includes the upper Palingkloof Member of the
Balfour Formation East of 24°E, and equivalent Harrismith
Member of the Normandien Formation in the Northern Free
State Province, as well as the entire Katberg Formation of the
Tarkastad Subgroup, Karoo Supergroup (Groenwald and
Kitching, 1995; Neveling, 2004; Smith and Botha-Brink, 2014).
A unit closely-spaced of multi-storied sandstone bodies lies
within the upper third of the Katberg Formation in the distal
parts of the Karoo Basin at various localities in the Xhariep
District. It was termed the Swartberg member by Neveling (2004)
after Swartberg Hill on the farm Bethel 763, southeast of the
town Bethulie in the Xhariep District, and although not a formal
member, it can be used to correlate between localities in the
distal (and with its laterally-equivalent sandstone package in the
proximal) sector of the basin (R Smith pers. obs.).
Above the Swartberg member the uppermost Katberg
Formation ﬁnes upwards into the Burgersdorp Formation,
which contains the overlying Cynognathus Assemblage Zone
(Neveling, 2004). Neveling (2004) followed du Toit’s (1917, 1918)
initial proposal and placed the uppermost boundary of the
Katberg Formation at the top of the uppermost, thick sandstone
package, above which the red mudrock of the Burgersdorp
Formation begins to dominate. The lowermost Burgersdorp
Formation may also be determined biostratigraphically by
the co-occurrence of Procolophon and trematosaurid and
mastodonsaurid amphibians (Neveling, 2004).
Derivation of name
The name is derived from Lystrosaurus declivis, the most
common vertebrate fossil species found within, and limited to,
strata of this biozone.
Historical background
Broom ﬁrst introduced the Lystrosaurus and Procolophon zones
in 1906 and du Toit (1918) later remarked on the usefulness of
Lystrosaurus for regional mapping purposes. Tripathi and
Satsangi (1963) reported the presence of Lystrosaurus in the
Panchet beds of India. Because these beds interdigitate with
marine facies containing a well-established Triassic invertebrate
fauna, Lystrosaurus became widely regarded as a Triassic taxon.
Kitching (1970, 1977) expanded the Karoo biozone to include
Procolophon because he maintained that it was found
throughout the zone (although later studies have shown that
Procolophon is limited to the upper two-thirds of the zone,
Botha and Smith, 2006). Keyser (1979) proposed the name
Lystrosaurus-Thrinaxodon Assemblage Zone, which was
accepted by the South African Committee for Stratigraphy

208

(S.A.C.S.) in 1980. However, S.A.C.S. later reverted to the term
Lystrosaurus Assemblage Zone and it was published as such in
the S.A.C.S. Biostratigraphic Series No. 1 (Groenewald and
Kitching, 1995). Lystrosaurus has since been found within the
uppermost portion of the underlying Permian Daptocephalus
Assemblage Zone (Smith, 1995; Smith and Ward, 2001; Botha
and Smith, 2007) and thus, we revise the name to Lystrosaurus
declivis Assemblage Zone to indicate the most abundant
Lystrosaurus species that is limited to the biozone.
Palaeontology
Description of Assemblage Zone
An assemblage zone characterised by a low diversity of
herbivorous vertebrates, the abundance of the dicynodont
therapsid Lystrosaurus declivis in association with the
dicynodont therapsid Lystrosaurus murrayi, the nonmammaliaform epicynodont therapsid Thrinaxodon liorhinus,
the procolophonoid parareptile Procolophon trigoniceps, and
the absence of the dicynodont therapsid Daptocephalus
leoniceps (Figure 1).
Taphonomic notes on fossil occurrence
The vertebrate fossils of the Lystrosaurus declivis Assemblage
Zone are primarily found in the mudrock sequences between
channel sandstones. Fossils are found as articulated, semi articulated or disarticulated, but still associated, skeletons
often within brown-weathering calcareous nodules. In some
planimetric exposures of channel bank facies of the Katberg
Formation many partially articulated dorsal-up skeletons, some
with mummiﬁed skin impressions can be found (Smith and
Botha-Brink, 2011). A taphonomically signiﬁcant occurrence in
this biozone is the ﬁrst appearance of monotaxic and multitaxic
bonebeds in the Karoo succession. Juvenile Lystrosaurus declivis
are the most common contributor to these ﬂoodplain hosted
bonebeds that are interpreted as drought induced die-offs
(Smith and Botha, 2005, Viglietti et al., 2013, Smith and
Botha-Brink, 2014). Positively identiﬁed skeletons of the
amphibian Broomistega (Fernandez, et al., 2013), the parareptile
Procolophon (Kitching, 1977), the dicynodont Lystrosaurus
(Modesto and Botha-Brink, 2010; Bordy et al., 2011; Botha-Brink,
2017) and the non-mammaliaform cynodont Thrinaxodon
(Damiani et al., 2003, Smith and Botha-Brink, 2014) have
been found within passively-ﬁlled underground burrow
structures in the mudrocks of the uppermost Balfour and
lower Katberg formations.
List of fossils
Abundant fossils of Lystrosaurus declivis are found from the
lowermost boundary of the zone through to the upper portion,
becoming scarce within the uppermost Katberg Formation
(Figure 1A). This species has yet to be found at the uppermost
boundary of the zone (Neveling, 2004). Lystrosaurus murrayi is
also found in great abundance from the lower boundary and
into the Katberg Formation, but positively identiﬁable material

SOUTH AFRICAN JOURNAL OF GEOLOGY

Downloaded from https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/gssa/sajg/article-pdf/123/2/207/5083298/207_0015_botha_smith.pdf
by University of Exeter user

J. BOTHA AN D R.M.H. SMI T H

Figure 1. Lateral and dorsal views of the index taxa deﬁning the Lystrosaurus declivis Assemblage Zone. (top) Lystrosaurus declivis, (centre) Thrinaxodon
liorhinus, (bottom) Procolophon trigoniceps .

of this species has not been found above the Swartberg member
(a regional member found in the Xhariep Municipal District
[previously Bethulie and Rouxville districts], Neveling, 2004)
in the uppermost Katberg Formation. These two species of
Lystrosaurus are by far the most common taxa found in the

assemblage zone. Thrinaxodon liorhinus (Figure 1B) is
commonly found in the Palingkloof Member and lowermost
Katberg Formation, becoming scarce in the uppermost portion
of the zone, although it has been found at the upper boundary
(Neveling, 2004). Procolophon trigoniceps (Figure 1C) is

SOUTH AFRICAN JOURNAL OF GEOLOGY

Downloaded from https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/gssa/sajg/article-pdf/123/2/207/5083298/207_0015_botha_smith.pdf
by University of Exeter user

209

B I O S T R AT I G R A P HY OF THE LY ST ROSAURUS DE C LIV IS ASSEMBLAGE ZONE (BEAUFORT GROUP, KAROO SUPERGROUP)
SOUTH AFRICA

restricted to the upper two-thirds of the Katberg Formation
and is found with increasing frequency from just below the
Swartberg member to the upper boundary of the zone. The nonmammaliaform epicynodont Galesaurus planiceps, which is
restricted to the Palingkloof Member and lowermost Katberg
Formation, is also found in relative abundance. Although
relatively rare, the archosauriform Proterosuchus fergusi is
one of the ﬁrst taxa to appear in the Lystrosaurus declivis
Assemblage Zone and is thus helpful in locating the lower
boundary of the zone. Fossils of the procolophonoid parareptiles
“Owenetta” kitchingorum and Saurodektes rogersorum, (note
that these two taxa are soon to be synonymized into Saurodektes
kitchingorum resulting in the absence of Owenetta from
the Triassic, Juan Cisneros pers. comm.) the dicynodont
Lystrosaurus curvatus, Triassic records of the therocephalian

Moschorhinus kitchingi (a boundary-crossing taxon), and the
non-mammaliaform epicynodont Progalesaurus lootsbergensis
are restricted to the Palingkloof Member (or equivalent units)
and have yet to be found in the overlying Katberg Formation
(Botha and Smith, 2007; Huttenlocker & Botha-Brink,
2013; Smith and Botha-Brink, 2014). A number of small
temnospondyls make their first appearance near the
base of this assemblage zone including Micropholis stowi,
Lydekkerina huxleyi and Broomistega putterilli, and at the
uppermost transition with the overlying Cynognathus
assemblage (Langbergia-Gargainia Subzone), the medium
to large temnospondyl Kestrosaurus and an indeterminate
trematosaurid (Damiani et al., 2000) also appear.
Ranges of the vertebrate genera are depicted in Figure 2.
Three new ichnofossils, Dicynodontipus, Procolophonichnium

Figure 2. Composite stratigraphic section showing the biostratigraphic ranges of the vertebrate taxa found within the Lystrosaurus declivis Assemblage
Zone. Lithological sections measured at Lootsberg Pass, Bethel and Perdelaagte. Scale in metres. P=Palingkloof, S=Swartberg, PTB=Permo-Triassic boundary.

210

SOUTH AFRICAN JOURNAL OF GEOLOGY

Downloaded from https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/gssa/sajg/article-pdf/123/2/207/5083298/207_0015_botha_smith.pdf
by University of Exeter user

J. BOTHA AN D R.M.H. SMI T H

and Rhynchosauroides (Marchetti et al., 2019) have been added
to the existing Thalassinoides and Histioderma attributed to
Procolophon and Lystrosaurus respectively.
According to the collection data provided by Smith et al.
(2012) by far the most abundant taxon encountered in the
LAZ is Lystrosaurus (73%) followed by Procolophon (17%),
Thrinaxodon (3%) and Lydekkerina (2%). However, both
Procolophon and Lydekkerina are known to occur as monotaxic
bonebed accumulations, which likely contributes to their overrepresentation in the collections. Smith and Botha-Brink (2014)
provide ﬁeld data that suggests that the actual abundance of
Lystrosaurus fossils is much higher. They record a narrow 20 m
thick interval in the Lower Katberg Formation of their Bethulie
section where Lystrosaurus fossils comprise more than 90% of
the faunal content.
Vertebrates
Amphibia

Amniota
Parareptilia

Eureptilia
Lepidosauromorpha
Archosauromorpha

Synapsida
Therapsida
Anomodontia

Therocephalia

Cynodontia

Micropholis stowi
Thabanchuia oomie
Lydekkerina huxleyi
Eolydekkerina magna
Broomulus dutoiti
Kestrosaurus dreyeri
Broomistega putterilli
Rhytidosteus capensis
Trematosauridae indet.
‘Owenetta’ kitchingorum
Saurodektes rogersorum
Sauropareion anoplus
Coletta seca
Phonodus dutoitorum
Procolophon trigoniceps
Paliguana whitei
Heleosuchus griesbachi
Noteosuchus colletti
Prolacerta broomi
Proterosuchus fergusi

Myosaurus gracilis
Lystrosaurus curvatus
Lystrosaurus murrayi
Lystrosaurus declivis
Lystrosaurus maccaigi
Ericiolacerta parva
Moschorhinus kitchingi
Olivierosuchus parringtoni
Promoschorhynchus platyrhinus
Regisaurus jacobi
Scaloposaurus constrictus
Tetracynodon darti
Progalesaurus lootsbergensis
Galesaurus planiceps
Thrinaxodon liorhinus
Platycraniellus elegans

Invertebrates Arthropoda

cf. Gymnostreptus

Plants

Agathoxylon
Glossopteris
Trizygia speciosum
Paracalamites

Trace fossils Invertebrate

Katbergia
Scoyenia
Macanopsis
Gyrolithes/Daimonelix
Cylindricum
Planolites
Skolithos
Thalassinoides (Procolophon)
Histioderma (Lystrosaurus)
Dicynodontipus
Procolophonichnium
Rhynchosauroides

Vertebrate

Geological description
Thickness of biozone
Maximum thickness is at least 830 m in the southeastern Karoo
Basin near Katberg Pass, becoming thinner in both westerly
and northerly directions. The biozone varies in thickness from
more than 830 m in the Groot Winterberg southwest of
Queenstown and approximately 450 m in Lootsberg Pass south
of Middelburg, to approximately 120 m at Oliviershoek Pass
south of Harrismith and approximately 40 m in the Normandien
Pass northeast of Harrismith (Figure 2). At its most westerly
occurrence near Nieu Bethesda, Eastern Cape and at its most
northerly occurrence at Verkykerskop in the Free State, the top
of the biozone is eroded away, but the remnants indicate
thicknesses of roughly 120 m and 40 m respectively.
Lithology
The lowermost portion of the Lystrosaurus declivis Assemblage
Zone comprises the predominantly argillaceous Palingkloof
Member of the Balfour Formation and is characterised by
massively-bedded maroon and olive-grey siltstone interbedded
with relatively few minor thin sandstone sheets with sharp,
ﬂat basal and upper contacts. The lower Palingkloof contains
tabular sheet sands structured with horizontal to climbing
ripple lamination and have distinctive sharp ﬂat basal and
upper contacts, the former commonly with sand-ﬁlled
desiccation polygons and the latter preserving patches of
claystone-veneered oscillation ripples. Horizons of roughsurfaced irregularly-shaped calcareous nodules and scattered
small spherical glaebules (possible pisoliths) with internal
shrinkage cracks are ubiquitous to these massive mudrock beds.
The distinguishing sedimentological features of this facies
include the predominance of the dark reddish-brown coloured
(2.5 YR 2.5/4) massively bedded silty mudstone. The upper
portion of the Palingkloof Member is distinguished from the
underlying section by a change in mudrock colour from dark

SOUTH AFRICAN JOURNAL OF GEOLOGY

Downloaded from https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/gssa/sajg/article-pdf/123/2/207/5083298/207_0015_botha_smith.pdf
by University of Exeter user

211

B I O S T R AT I G R A P HY OF THE LY ST ROSAURUS DE C LIV IS ASSEMBLAGE ZONE (BEAUFORT GROUP, KAROO SUPERGROUP)
SOUTH AFRICA

reddish-brown to a lighter maroon. This facies is characterised
by several 1 to 5 m thick regions of alternating 1 to 3 cm thick
mudstone-siltstone couplets. Irregularly-shaped calcareous
nodules (that often contain fossil bone), scattered small spherical
peloids with internal shrinkage cracks, and isolated Katbergia
and tetrapod burrow casts occur within the siltstone beds.
This unit gradually coarsens upwards into the predominantly
arenaceous Katberg Formation and reveals a progressive
increase in vertically stacked tabular olive-grey medium-grained
sandstone bodies, which are separated by upwardly thinning
intervals of blocky weathering light olive grey siltstone and
ﬁssile dark red mudstone beds. The thicker channel sandstones
commonly display elongate basal scours or gulleys that have
eroded into the underlying mudrock and are often ﬁlled
with lenses of reworked pedogenic nodule conglomerate. The
sandstones contain irregular disconformity surfaces that are
commonly lined with mudstone clast conglomerate whereas the
basal conglomerates consist of mud pebbles, reworked fossil
bone fragments and spheroidal pedogenic glaebules commonly
showing internal septarian shrinkage cracks (Botha et al. 2020).

Australia (Arakel, 1982) and the Indo-Gangetic alluvial plains of
India (Khadkikar et al., 1998). In both instances they are formed
by the repeated alternation between saturated and dry soil
moisture conditions under a warm climate monsoonal rainfall
regime. The appearance of similar septarian glaebules in the
PTB stratigraphic record in the main Karoo Basin serves to
strengthen the sedimentological facies interpretation for warm
climatic conditions with highly seasonal rainfall in this part
of western Gondwana in the earliest Triassic. Pace et al.
(2009) interpreted the pisolitic conglomerates as remnants of
completely degraded landscapes.

Depositional environment

The upper boundary of the Lystrosaurus declivis Assemblage
Zone is drawn at the ﬁrst occurrence of the fairly common
trirachodontid cynodont Langbergia and the medium-sized
archosauriform Garjainia, deﬁning the base of the Cynognathus
Assemblage Zone.

The sequence of Lystrosaurus declivis Assemblage zone
depositional facies from predominantly red mudrocks with thin
sheet sandstones up into a progressively more arenaceous
succession dominated by vertically-stacked multi-storey channel
sandstones is interpreted as a rapid shift from the high sinuosity
meandering channels of the Daptocephalus Assemblage Zone
below, through low sinuosity anastomosed systems in the lower
half of the zone, into a northward prograding braid-plain setting
in the upper half along with concomitant climatic drying (Smith
1995, Smith and Botha-Brink 2014).
The silt and sand-ﬁlled desiccation cracks and the presence
of silt granules in the red mudrocks are interpreted as the
ﬁrst indication of aeolian dust in the depocentre. A loessic
contribution to the thick massive silty-mudstone is supported by
their uniform massive texture with planar or gently undulating
contacts that are commonly veneered with claystone indicative
of relatively rapid, episodic sedimentation (Giles et al., 2013).
Weakly developed pedogenesis with textural Bca horizons
showing claystone-lined shrink/swell planes and small spherical
carbonate nodules are interpreted as immature loessic soils
similar to the Triassic loessites described by Chan (1999) from
the Ankareh Formation of north-central Utah.
The vertically accreted multi-storied conglomeratic
sandstone bodies are similar to the sandy ephemeral stream
channel ﬁlls described from the mid-Devonian of southern
England by Tunbridge (1984). He interpreted them as inchannel deposits of wide, shallow low-sinuosity rivers with a
highly ﬂuctuating discharge regime. The presence of numerous
spherical pea-sized calcareous pisoliths (or glaebules) with
septarian shrinkage cracks in the clast-supported melange of red
mudrock pebbles, rolled bone fragments and other pedogenic
calcareous nodules indicate that they too are reworked from the
alluvium into which the channel has incised. The pisoliths are
similar to those described from Quaternary calcretes of western

212

Boundaries
Lower boundary
Characterised by the ﬁrst appearance of the dicynodonts
Lystrosaurus declivis and Lystrosaurus murrayi, and the
archosauriform Proterosuchus fergusi.
Upper boundary

Lateral boundaries
Outcrops continuously around the Karoo Basin (Figure 3).
Subdivisions
There are no formal subdivisions within the biozone. However,
Lystrosaurus declivis and L. murrayi become very abundant in
the lowermost Katberg Formation, which has been referred to
as the Lystrosaurus abundant zone (Botha and Smith, 2006),
and Procolophon dominates the upper third of the Katberg
Formation, which has resulted in this region sometimes being
referred to as a Procolophon abundant zone (e.g. Broom, 1906;
Neveling et al., 2004; Botha and Smith, 2006).
Regional aspects
Geographic distribution
The main outcrop of the Lystrosaurus declivis Assemblage Zone
strata comprises a region of varying thickness that extends from
just south of Middelburg in the southeast to Mthatha (previously
Umtata) in the southwest in the Eastern Cape Province
northward through the western Kwa-Zulu Natal Province and
through the eastern Free State Province to Harrismith in the
northeast (Figure 3).
Lateral variation
The relative abundance and diversity of the Lystrosaurus declivis
assemblage is constant throughout the basin. The only

SOUTH AFRICAN JOURNAL OF GEOLOGY

Downloaded from https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/gssa/sajg/article-pdf/123/2/207/5083298/207_0015_botha_smith.pdf
by University of Exeter user

J. BOTHA AN D R.M.H. SMI T H

Figure 3. Distribution of the Lystrosaurus declivis Assemblage Zone (green) in the Beaufort Group (yellow). Type locality (see Figure 4) is indicated by
open square.

discernible variation is in the maximum size of L declivis that
appears to gain larger maximum body sizes in the northern and
eastern parts of the basin compared to further south.
Correlation
The Lystrosaurus declivis Assemblage Zone is equivalent to the
Lootsbergian land-vertebrate faunachron of Lucas (1998). These
vertebrate-deﬁned units correlate chronostratigraphically with
assemblages of the lower Fremouw Formation of Antarctica
(Kitching et al., 1972), the Sanga do Cabral Formation, Paraná
Basin of Brazil (based on the presence of Procolophon)
(Barbarena et al., 1981; Souto-Rieiro and Holz, 1998; Abdala
et al., 2002), and the Panchet Formation, Damodar Basin of India
(Bandyopadhyay et al., 2002). The latter Panchet records also
preserve reliable age controls based on marine-nonmarine
interbeds.
Other age-equivalent assemblages may include LAZ-like
vertebrates at higher taxonomic-levels, but present unique
species endemic to those areas, and have yet to produce strong

overlap with the South African species from paleontological
collecting. These include the Vokhmian and Rybinskian
gorizonts of the Vetlugian Series in the South Urals Basin of
Russia (Benton et al., 2004) and the lower Jiucaiyuan Formation,
Junggar Basin of northwestern China (Cheng, 1993).
Lastly, other continental assemblages, as well as marinenonmarine transitional assemblages, are known that include
important invertebrate and macro- and micro-ﬂoral records,
but lack stratigraphically informative vertebrates, making links
to the Karoo Basin record more challenging. These include: the
Kockatea Formation, Perth Basin, Blina Formation, Fitzroy Basin,
Gosford and Terrigal formations, Sydney Basin, the Sagittarius
Sandstone and Arcadia formations, Bowen Basin of Australia
(Ochev and Shishkin, 1989; Michaelsen, 2002), and the Wordie
Creek Formation of eastern Greenland (Lucas, 1998).
Age
The Lystrosaurus declivis Assemblage Zone is generally
considered to be Early Triassic (Induan to early Olenekian)

SOUTH AFRICAN JOURNAL OF GEOLOGY

Downloaded from https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/gssa/sajg/article-pdf/123/2/207/5083298/207_0015_botha_smith.pdf
by University of Exeter user

213

B I O S T R AT I G R A P HY OF THE LY ST ROSAURUS DE C LIV IS ASSEMBLAGE ZONE (BEAUFORT GROUP, KAROO SUPERGROUP)
SOUTH AFRICA

based on global correlations with fossil plants and vertebrates
(Lucas, 1998). Recent studies suggest that the upper Palingkloof
Member is not older than 252.24 +/-0.1 (Gastaldo et al., 2020)
and may be as young as 251.7+/-0.3 (Botha et al., 2020). This
likely places the base of the Lystrosaurus declivis Assemblage
Zone within the basal Triassic as in the Lystrosaurus murrayidominated fauna of the Panchet beds in India (Tripathi and
Satsangi, 1963).

as Fairydale) in the Xhariep District 30 km northeast of the
town Bethulie. We name the locality Bethel for brevity (GPS
co-ordinates from the top of Swartberg Hill on Bethel 763
on 1:50 000 map 3026AD Tampasfontein: 30° 25’12.43”S
26° 15’ 30.42”E, taken from Google Earth, 2018) and it is selected
because of the abundance and diversity (at least 18 species) of
tetrapod fossils that it has produced over the years, including
the three index taxa and covers most of the zone from the base
to the top of the Swartberg member (Figure 4).

Type locality
Acknowledgements
Groenewald and Kitching (1995) erected the holostratotype of
the biozone along highway N9 through Lootsberg Pass and the
adjacent area, between Graaff-Reinet and Middelburg, Eastern
Cape Province. Approximately 450 m of the lower part of the
zone is exposed in this area, but the uppermost Katberg
Formation is not exposed here and importantly, relatively few
fossils have been found in the road cutting and adjacent area.
Thus, we introduce a new type locality for the Lystrosaurus
declivis Assemblage Zone, a well-known locality that encompasses
exposures on three adjoining farms, namely Bethel 763,
Heldenmoed 677 and Donald 207 (commonly referred to

We are grateful to the staff of the Karoo Palaeontology
laboratories at Iziko South African Museum and the National
Museum, Bloemfontein for their tireless ﬁeldwork and their
painstaking preparation and curation of the fossils. The
African Origins platform of the National Research Foundation
of South Africa (Grant no. 117704), the Palaeontological
Scientiﬁc Trust (PAST) and the DST-NRF Centre of Excellence
in Palaeosciences (CoE-Pal) are acknowledged for ﬁnancial
assistance.

Figure 4. Map of the Type locality of the Lystrosaurus declivis Assemblage Zone on the farms Bethel, Heldenmoed and Donald in the Smithﬁeld District,
Eastern Cape, South Africa.

214

SOUTH AFRICAN JOURNAL OF GEOLOGY

Downloaded from https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/gssa/sajg/article-pdf/123/2/207/5083298/207_0015_botha_smith.pdf
by University of Exeter user

J. BOTHA AN D R.M.H. SMI T H

References
Abdala, F., Dias-da-Silva, S. and Cisneros, J.C., 2002. First record of nonmammalian cynodonts (Therapsida) in the Sanga do Cabral Formation
(Early Triassic) of southern Brazil. Palaeontologia africana, 38, 93-98.
Arakel, A.V., 1982. Genesis of calcrete in Quaternary soil proﬁles, Hutt and
Leeman lagoons, Western Australia. Journal of Sedimentary Research 52,
109-125.
Bandyopadhyay, S., RoyChowdhury, T.K. and Sengupta, D.P., 2002.
Taphonomy of some Gondwana vertebrate assemblages of India.
Sedimentary Geology, 147, 219-245.
Barberena, M.C., Lavina, E.L. and Becker, M.R., 1981. Sobre a presença de
tetrápodes n Formação Sanga do Cabral (Grupo Rosário do Sul), Triássico
do Rio Grande do Sul, Brasil. Anais do II Congresso Latino-Americano de
Paleontología, 1, 295-306.
Benton, M.J., Tverdokhlebov, V.P. and Surkov, M.V., 2004. Ecosystem
remodelling among vertebrates at the Permian-Triassic boundary in Russia.
Nature, 432, 97-100.
Bordy, E.M., Sztanó, O., Rubidge, B.S. and Bumby, A., 2011. Early Triassic
vertebrate burrows from the Katberg Formation of the south-western Karoo
Basin, South Africa. Lethaia, 44, 33-45.
Botha-Brink, J., 2017. Burrowing in Lystrosaurus: preadaptation to a
postextinction environment? Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 37, (5):
e1365080.
Botha, J. and Smith, R.M.H., 2006. Rapid vertebrate recuperation in the Karoo
Basin of South Africa following the end-Permian extinction. Journal of
African Earth Sciences, 45, 502-514.
Botha, J. and Smith, R.M.H., 2007. Lystrosaurus species composition across the
Permo-Triassic boundary of South Africa. Lethaia, 40, 125-137.
Botha, J., Huttenlocker, A.K., Smith, R.M.H., Prevec, R., Viglietti, P. and
Modesto, S., 2020. New geochemical and palaeontological data from the
Permo-Triassic boundary in the South African Karoo Basin test the
synchrony of terrestrial and marine extinctions. Palaeogeography,
Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology. DOI: 10.1016/j.palaeo.2019.109467
Broom, R., 1906. On the Permian and Triassic faunas of South Africa.
Geological Magazine, 5, 29-30.
Chan, M.A., 1999. Triassic loessite of North-Central Utah: stratigraphy,
petrophysical character, and paleoclimate implications. Journal of
Sedimentary Research 69, 477-485.
Cheng, Z., 1993. On the discovery and signiﬁcance of the nonmarine PermoTriassic Transition Zone at Dalongkou in Jimusar, Xinjiang, China. In: S.G.
Lucas and M. Morales (Editors), The Nonmarine Triassic, 3, 65-67 Bulletin
of the New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science, New Mexico.
Damiani, R.J., Neveling, J., Hancox, P.J. and Rubidge B.S., 2000. First
trematosaurid temnospondyl from the Lystrosaurus Assemblage Zone of
South Africa and its biostratigraphic implications. Geological Magazine 137,
659-665.
Damiani, R., Modesto, S., Yates, A. and Neveling, J., 2003. Earliest evidence of
cynodont burrowing. Proceedings of the Royal Society London B, 270,
1747-1751.
Du Toit, A.L., 1917. The geology of part of the Transkei. Explanation of Cape
Sheet 27 (Maclear – Umtata). Geological Survey of South Africa, 32pp.
Du Toit, A.L., 1918. The zones of the Karroo System and their distribution.
Proceedings of the Geological Society of South Africa, 21, 17-37.
Fernandez, V., Abdala, F., Carlson, K.J., Cook, D.C., Rubidge, B.S., Yates, A.
and Tafforeau, P., 2013. Synchrotron reveals Early Triassic odd couple:
Injured amphibian and aestivating therapsid share burrow. PLoS ONE 8,
e64978. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0064978.
Gastaldo, R.A., Kamo, S.L., Neveling, J., Geissman, W., Looy, C.V. and Martini,
A.M., 2020. The base of the Lystrosaurus Assemblage Zone, Karoo Basin,
predates the end-Permian marine extinction. Nature Communications 11,
1428. doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15243-7
Giles, J.A., Soreghan, M.J., Benison, K.C., Soreghan, G.S. and Hasiotis, S.T.,
2013. Lakes, loess and paleosols in the Permain Wellington Formation of
Oklahoma, USA: implications for palaeoclimate and palaeogeography
of the midcontinent. Journal of Sedimentary Research, 83, 825-846.

Groenewald, G.H. and Kitching, J.W., 1995. Biostratigraphy of the Lystrosaurus
Assemblage Zone. South African Committee for Stratigraphy. Biostratigraphic
Series 1, 35-39.
Huttenlocker, A.K. and Botha-Brink, J., 2013. Body size and growth patterns
in the therocephalian Moschorhinus kitchingi (Therapsida: Eutheriodontia)
before and after the end-Permian extinction in South Africa. Paleobiology,
39, 253-277.
Khadkikar, A., Merh S.S., Malik, J.N. and Chamyal, L.S., 1998. Calcretes in
semi-arid alluvial systems: Formative pathways and sinks. Sedimentary
Geology, 116, 251-260.
Keyser, A.W., 1979. A review of the biozonation of the Beaufort Group in the
Karoo basin of South Africa. Geological Society of South Africa, Abstracts
1979 Geological Congress 2, 13-31.
Kitching, J.W., 1970. A short review of the Beaufort zoning in South Africa.
In: S.H. Haughton (Editor), I.U.G.S., 2nd Gondwana Symposium Proceedings
and Papers, 309-312.
Kitching, J.W., 1977. The distribution of the Karroo vertebrate fauna. Bernard
Price Institute for Palaeontological Research Memoir 1, 1-131.
Kitching, J.W., Collinson, J.W., Elliot, D.H. and Colbert, E.H., 1972. Lystrosaurus
Zone (Triassic) fauna from Antarctica. Science, 175, 524-527.
Lucas, S.G., 1998. Global Triassic tetrapod biostratigraphy and biochronology.
Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, 143, 347-384.
Marchetti, L., Klein, H., Buchwitz, M., Ronchi, A., Smith, R.M.H., De Klerk, E.,
Sciscio, L. and Groenwald, G., 2019. Ichnoassociations of Permian and
Triassic tetrapod footprints in the Karoo Basin of South Africa. Gondwana
Research 72,139-168.
Michaelsen, P., 2002. Mass extinction of peat-forming plants and the
effect on ﬂuvial styles across the Permian-Triassic boundary, northern
Bowen Basin, Australia, Palaeogeography Palaeoclimatology Palaeoecology,
179, 173-188.
Modesto, S.P. and Botha-Brink, J., 2010. A burrow cast with Lystrosaurus
skeletal remains from the Lower Triassic of South Africa. Palaios, 25,
274-281.
Neveling, J., 2004. Stratigraphic and sedimentological investigation of the
contact between the Lystrosaurus and Cynognathus Assemblage Zones
(Beaufort Group: Karoo Supergroup). Council for Geoscience Bulletin 137,
1-165.
Neveling, J., Hancox, P.J. and Rubidge, B.S., 2004. Biostratigraphy of the lower
Burgersdorp Formation (Beaufort Group; Karoo Supergroup) of South
Africa – implications for the stratigraphic ranges of Early Triassic tetrapods.
Palaeontologia africana, 41, 81-87.
Ochev, V.G. and Shishkin, M.A., 1989. On the principles of global correlation
of the continental Triassic on the tetrapods. Acta Palaeontologica Polonica,
34, 149-173.
Pace, D.W., Gastaldo, R.A. and Neveling, J., 2009. Early Triassic aggradational
and degradational landscapes of the Karoo Basin and evidence for climate
oscillation following the P–Tr Event. Journal of Sedimentary Research, 79,
316-331.
Smith, R.M.H., 1995. Changing ﬂuvial environments across the Permian–
Triassic boundary in the Karoo Basin, South Africa, and possible causes of
the extinctions. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, 117,
81-104.
Smith, R.M.H. and Botha-Brink, J., 2011. Anatomy of an extinction: EndPermian drought induced die-off in the Karoo Basin, South Africa. Abstracts
SVP Annual Meeting Las Vegas Journal Vertebrate Palaeontology, SVP
Program and Abstracts Book, 2011, 196.
Smith, R.M.H., Rubidge, B.S. and van der Walt, M., 2012. Therapsid biodiversity
patterns and paleoenvironments of the Karoo Basin, South Africa. In:
A. Chinsamy (Editor), The forerunners of mammals: radiation, histology
and biology. Indiana University Press, Bloomington, 31-62.
Smith, R.M.H. and Botha-Brink, J., 2014. Anatomy of an extinction:
Sedimentological and taphonomic evidence for drought-induced
die-offs during the Permo-Triassic mass extinction in the main Karoo
Basin, South Africa. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology,
396, 99-118.

SOUTH AFRICAN JOURNAL OF GEOLOGY

Downloaded from https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/gssa/sajg/article-pdf/123/2/207/5083298/207_0015_botha_smith.pdf
by University of Exeter user

215

B I O S T R AT I G R A P HY OF THE LY ST ROSAURUS DE C LIV IS ASSEMBLAGE ZONE (BEAUFORT GROUP, KAROO SUPERGROUP)
SOUTH AFRICA

Smith, R.M.H. and Ward, P.D., 2001. Pattern of vertebrate extinctions across an
event bed at the Permian–Triassic boundary in the Karoo Basin of South
Africa. Geological Society of America Bulletin, 29, 1147-1150.
Souto-Ribeiro, A.W. and Holz, M., 1998. The Early Triassic Sanga do Cabral
(Paraná Basin, Brazil) and Katberg Sandstone (Karoo Basin, South Africa)
Formations: a possible ‘taphocorrelation’. Journal of African Earth Sciences,
27 (1A), 189pp.
Tripathi, C. and Satsangi, P. P., 1963. Lystrosaurus fauna of the Panchet series
of the Raniganj coalﬁeld. Memoirs of the Geological Survey of India,
Palaeontologia Indica, New series 37, 1-65.

216

Tunbridge, I.P., 1984. Facies model for a sandy ephemeral stream and clay
playa complex; the Middle Devonian Trentishoe Formation of North Devon,
U.K. Sedimentology 31, 697-715.
Viglietti P.A., Smith R.M.H. and Compton J.S., 2013. Origin and
palaeoenvironmental signiﬁcance of Lystrosaurus bonebeds in the earliest
Triassic Karoo Basin, South Africa. Palaeogeography, Palaeoecology,
Palaeoclimatology, 392, 9-21.

Editorial handling: R.M.H. Smith.

SOUTH AFRICAN JOURNAL OF GEOLOGY

Downloaded from https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/gssa/sajg/article-pdf/123/2/207/5083298/207_0015_botha_smith.pdf
by University of Exeter user

